Standard Authorization Request (SAR)

Complete and submit this form, with attachment(s)    The North American Electric Reliability Corporation
to the NERC Help Desk. Upon entering the Captcha,    (NERC) welcomes suggestions to improve the reliability
please type in your contact information, and attach  of the bulk power system through improved Reliability
the SAR to your ticket. Once submitted, you will     Standards.
receive a confirmation number which you can use to
track your request.

                                   Requested information

SAR Title:                   Reliability Standards to Address Computational Load - Phase I

Date Submitted:              February 20, 2026

SAR Requester

Name:            Jamie Calderon, Sandhya Madan

Organization: NERC

Telephone:       404-960-0568                        Email:  Jamie.Calderon@nerc.net
                 470-698-8827                                Sandhya.Madan@nerc.net

SAR Type (Check as many as apply)

New Standard                                         Imminent Action/ Confidential Issue (SPM

Revision to Existing Standard                                Section 10)

Add, Modify or Retire a Glossary Term                Variance development or revision

Withdraw/retire an Existing Standard                 Other (Please specify)

Justification for this proposed standard development project (Check all that apply to help NERC

prioritize development)

       Regulatory Initiation                         NERC Standing Committee Identified
       Emerging Risk (Reliability Issues Steering    Enhanced Periodic Review Initiated
Committee) Identified                                Industry Stakeholder Identified
       Reliability Standard Development Plan

What is the risk to the Bulk Electric System (What Bulk Electric System (BES) reliability benefit does the

proposed project provide?):

This project will address the risks posed to the Bulk-Power System (BPS) due to the emergence of new
large loads (e.g., data centers, crypto mining) that are connecting to the grid at an unprecedented scale
and speed.

As discussed within the 2025 ERO Reliability Risk Priorities Report, these large loads change the landscape
of customer demand from organic population-driven growth to rapid investment-based deployment of
data centers (including hyperscalers, artificial intelligence (AI), and cryptocurrency), onshoring of
manufacturing activities, electrification of industrial processes, and commercial and residential
electrification. Some of these loads are asynchronous to the grid, creating system conditions and ride-
through challenges during system events. Integrating these large loads and viewing them as BPS resources
for flexibility and reliability contribution, when possible, will be challenging but crucial.

Other aspects of BPS security and reliability, such as growing uncertainties with global supply chains and
development, are similarly impacted. Demand growth from data centers will exacerbate the need for

RELIABILITY | RESILIENCE | SECURITY

POWERING TODAY. PROTECTING TOMORROW.
                                              Requested information
network upgrades and new resources, and uncertainty around supply chains, international trade, import
tariffs, and country restriction issues are disruptive to plans and schedules.

To better understand the reliability impact(s) of emerging large loads, NERC's Reliability and Security
Technical Committee (RSTC) established the Large Load Task Force (LLTF) and developed a work plan. The
Member Representatives Committee provided written input to this work plan and hosted a technical
panel session at the February 2025 Board meeting. NERC's Board also issued a resolution in February 2025
directing NERC staff to develop an action plan, which will complement the work of the LLTF and provide
additional structure to NERC's efforts related to large load integration.

The LLTF released their Characteristics and Risks of Emerging Large Loads white paper and summary report
of the white paper in July of 2025. This whitepaper similarly identified the impacts that BPS is currently
experiencing from large loads and the anticipated increased impacts that large loads will have.

Due to the scale and pace of integrating large loads, NERC is proposing changes to its regulatory
framework to have visibility of these impactful BPS users and to enable mitigation of these increasing risks.
These changes include: (1) revisions to the Rules of Procedure (ROP) registry criteria, including the
development of new NERC registered entity classification consistent with the functional entity
classification being developed through registration efforts that include "Computational Loads "; (2)
corresponding revisions to the Glossary of Terms used in NERC Reliability Standards (NERC Glossary); and
(3) the development of new or modified Reliability Standards.

NERC is also developing a Level 3 Alert containing specific actions that NERC has determined are
essential for owners, operators, or users of the BPS to take to ensure the reliability of the BPS. NERC
expects to take the proposed Level 3 Alert to the NERC Board of Trustees for action in May 2026.
Purpose or Goal (What are the reliability gap(s) or risk(s) to the Bulk Electric System being addressed,
and how does this proposed project provide the reliability-related benefit described above?):
The goal of this project will be twofold and require developing: (1) changes to the NERC Glossary to
include large load entities, consistent with the proposed modifications for registration criteria in NERC's
Rules of Procedure; and (2) a Reliability Standard addressing reliability issues associated with integrating
these large loads onto the BPS.
Project Scope (Define the parameters of the proposed project):

The drafting team assigned to this project will coordinate closely with the NERC Staff developing
proposed revisions to the NERC Rules of Procedure registry criteria to address the impacts of large loads
affecting the reliability of the BPS.

The scope of this project will include:

    1. Coordinating with the NERC ROP revisions team to develop new terms and definitions for
         inclusion in the NERC Glossary that align with the proposed changes to the Rules of Procedure
         registry criteria, to support the development of Reliability Standards applicable to and relating to
         large loads affecting the reliability of the BPS.

    2. Considering the Level 3 Alert Essential Actions (to be issued May 2025), the July 2025 LLTF white
         paper, and other information and stakeholder feedback, to develop one or more Reliability

Standard Authorization Request (SAR)                                                                           2
                                              Requested information
         Standard(s) to address the most critical reliability issues associated with integrating these large
         loads onto the BPS in the near-term.
    3. Considering along with NERC staff and the NERC Large Load Working Group, a Phase 2 Standard
         Authorization Request to address the development of other new or revised Reliability Standards
         to address computational load needs.
Detailed Description (Describe the proposed deliverable(s) with sufficient detail for a drafting team to
execute the project. If you propose a new or substantially revised Reliability Standard or definition,
provide: (1) a technical justification1 of developing a new or revised Reliability Standard or definition,
which includes a discussion of the risk and impact to reliability-of the BES, and (2) a technical foundation
document (e.g., research paper) to guide development of the Standard or definition):

This drafting team will coordinate with the NERC ROP revisions team to develop Glossary definitions
corresponding to proposed revisions to the NERC registry criteria under development, including:

     a. "Computational Load": tentatively defined as Load comprised of power demand from
         information technology equipment, such as servers, storage, and networking hardware.

     b. "Computational Load Entity": tentatively defined as Entity with Load that includes
         Computational Load.

     c. Other defined terms for inclusion in the Glossary, as identified as needed during this project.

This drafting team will develop one or more Reliability Standard(s) to address in the near-term essential
actions entities must take to assure the reliable integration of large loads into the BPS.

This drafting team will also work with NERC Staff and the NERC LLWG to consider if revisions to
currently effective or NERC Board of Trustees adopted standards are needed, including existing
standards in the MOD, PRC, TOP/IRO, and COM standards families. In the interest of time, these
revisions may be pursued as part of a Phase II project.

Recommended Approach

Due to the urgent nature of the reliability risks to be addressed, NERC Staff recommends the drafting
team pursue the development of a new Reliability Standard addressing, in one place, the essential
actions that must be addressed in the near term. This approach would allow for a timelier path to
mitigation for the most critical issues and present the fewest conflicts with existing and recently
completed projects addressing other reliability issues in the Reliability Standards most likely to be
implicated (e.g., MOD, TOP/IRO, PRC). Subsequent phase(s) could incorporate and expand upon
consensus approaches for addressing large load issues into the existing Reliability Standards, phasing
out the initial standard over time as work completes.

The drafting team is not bound to Staff's recommended approach and may revise or develop an
alternative approach to addressing the most urgent issues as informed by its expertise, technical
information or analysis, or stakeholder feedback.

1 The NERC Rules of Procedure require a technical justification for new or substantially revised Reliability Standards. Please attach pertinent
information to this form before submittal to NERC.

Standard Authorization Request (SAR)                                                                          3
                                              Requested information
Cost Impact Assessment, if known (Provide a paragraph describing the potential cost impacts associated
with the proposed project):
Cost impacts are unknown currently. NERC Staff anticipates there may be significant cost impacts,
although the costs for implementing specific requirements are likely to vary by entity and region.
Please describe any unique characteristics of the BES facilities that may be impacted by this proposed
standard development project (e.g., Dispersed Generation Resources):
This project proposes to establish requirements applicable to users of the BPS who are impactful to BPS
reliability, and entities who interface with such users.
To assist the NERC Standards Committee in appointing a drafting team with the appropriate members,
please indicate to which Functional Entities the proposed standard(s) should apply (e.g., Transmission
Operator, Reliability Coordinator, etc. See the NERC Rules of Procedure Appendix 5A:
Members should have experience in operating large load facilities, interfacing with large load facilities,
or studying large load facilities in the operations or planning time horizons. Members should also include
representatives with experience in compliance or registration matters due to the overlap with the NERC
registry criteria revision process.
Do you know of any consensus building activities2 in connection with this SAR? If so, please provide any
recommendations or findings resulting from the consensus building activity.

NERC's Reliability and Security Technical Committee established the LLTF to analyze the reliability impacts
related to emerging large loads (e.g., data centers (including cryptocurrency mining and AI), industrial
facilities, and hydrogen production facilities).

The LLTF was also tasked with defining large loads, and is currently working on a reliability gap analysis
white paper to provide more insight on where the most significant risks exist.
Are there any related standards or SARs that should be assessed for impact as a result of this proposed
project? If so, which standard(s) or project number(s)?
No.
Are there alternatives (e.g., guidelines, white paper, alerts, etc.) that have been considered or could
meet the objectives? If so, please list the alternatives with the benefits of using them.

A large loads white paper was prepared in July 2025. A Level 2 Alert was issued in September 2025 to
address reliability concerns related to rapid, major load swings. The alert assessed industry readiness and
provided recommendations to help mitigate risks to BPS reliability resulting from integrating Large Loads
to the BPS. A Level 3 ­ Essential Actions Alert is being prepared for NERC Board of Trustees consideration
in April 2026.

Given the breadth and extent of the reliability issues, these measures represent an important start but
are insufficient to fully address the risks. Full mitigation requires updating the NERC Rules of Procedure
registry criteria and developing targeted Reliability Standards to require risk mitigating action.

2 Consensus building activities are occasionally conducted by NERC and/or project review teams. They typically are conducted to obtain industry
inputs prior to proposing any standard development project to revise, or develop a standard or definition.

Standard Authorization Request (SAR)                                                                         4
                                                Reliability Principles
Does this proposed standard development project support at least one of the following Reliability
Principles? Please check all those that apply.

       1. Interconnected bulk power systems shall be planned and operated in a coordinated manner
            to perform reliably under normal and abnormal conditions as defined in the NERC Standards.

       2. The frequency and voltage of interconnected bulk power systems shall be controlled within
            defined limits through the balancing of real and reactive power supply and demand.

       3. Information necessary for the planning and operation of interconnected bulk power systems
            shall be made available to those entities responsible for planning and operating the systems
            reliably.

       4. Plans for emergency operation and system restoration of interconnected bulk power systems
            shall be developed, coordinated, maintained and implemented.

       5. Facilities for communication, monitoring and control shall be provided, used and maintained
            for the reliability of interconnected bulk power systems.

       6. Personnel responsible for planning and operating interconnected bulk power systems shall be
            trained, qualified, and have the responsibility and authority to implement actions.

       7. The security of the interconnected bulk power systems shall be assessed, monitored and
            maintained on a wide area basis.

       8. Bulk power systems shall be protected from malicious physical or cyber attacks.

                                           Market Interface Principles                         Enter
Does the proposed standard development project comply with all of the following               (yes/no)
Market Interface Principles?                                                               Y
                                                                                           Y
    1. A reliability standard shall not give any market participant an unfair competitive  Y
         advantage.
                                                                                           Y
    2. A reliability standard shall neither mandate nor prohibit any specific market
         structure.

    3. A reliability standard shall not preclude market solutions to achieving compliance
         with that standard.

    4. A reliability standard shall not require the public disclosure of commercially
         sensitive information. All market participants shall have equal opportunity to
         access commercially non-sensitive information that is required for compliance
         with reliability standards.

     Identified Existing or Potential Regional or Interconnection Variances

Region(s)/                            Explanation

Interconnection

n/a              n/a

Standard Authorization Request (SAR)                                                                      5
                                      For Use by NERC Only

Risk Tracking

Grid Transformation                          Energy Policy
Resilience to Extreme Events                 Critical Infrastructure Interdependencies
Security

CMEP Feedback

Yes              No

Version History

Version        Date                   Owner                  Change Tracking

      1        June 3, 2013                                  Revised
      1        August 29, 2014
      2        January 18, 2017       Standards Information Staff Updated template
      2        June 28, 2017
      3        February 22, 2019      Standards Information Staff Revised

      4        February 25, 2020      Standards Information Staff Updated template
      5        August 14, 2023
                                      Standards Information Staff Added instructions to submit via Help
      6        June 4, 2024                                                Desk

      7        July 14, 2025          Standards Information Staff Updated template footer
      8        July 28, 2025
                                      Standards Development  Updated template as part of
                                      Staff                  Standards Process Stakeholder
                                                             Engagement Group

                                      Standards Information Staff Updated link to the NERC Reliability
                                                                           Principles

                                      Standards Information Staff Minor edits to template

                                      Standards Information Staff Updated NERC Only section to match
                                                                           2025 RISC report.

Standard Authorization Request (SAR)                                                                     6
