--- PAGE 1 ---
Large Loads Task Force White Paper Series
The LLTF plans to produce two white papers in 2025: 
The first will identify risks to BPS reliability, while the 
second will provide a Gap Analysis.
• The first white paper , Characteristics and Risks
of Emerging Loads, set to publish in July, finds that
large loads vary in size—from several megawatts to
several gigawatts—presenting unique challenges
for the reliability and security of the BPS.
• The second white 
paper—Assessment of Gaps
in Existing Practices, Requirements, and
Reliability Standards for Emerging Large Loads—is
scheduled to publish later this year and will assess
potential gaps
 in current practices, requirements,
and Reliability Standards for each risk identified
in the first white paper.
Reliability Guideline: Risk Mitigation 
Once the white papers are completed, they will be used 
to develop the Reliability Guideline: Risk Mitigation for 
Emerging Large Loads. Scheduled for release in the first 
half of 2026, the guideline will provide recommendations 
for risk mitigation, including improvements to modeling 
practices, analyses, coordination, data collection efforts, 
real-time monitoring, and event analysis. 
Workshop Series 
An industry workshop took place in June that focused 
on mitigating risks from emerging large loads in which 
Dominion Energy   highlighted their recent experience 
with unplanned data center load transfers and the actions 
being taken to increase BPS reliability. Additionally, 
American Electric Power shared a potential risk mitigation 
technique that would ensure that the variability of 
emerging large loads is accounted for when planning 
automatic underfrequency load shedding programs. 
The next workshop, scheduled for July 24, will focus on 
mitigating risks from emerging large loads. Audience 
members will be able to provide input on risk mitigations. 
The workshop is open to the public and the links to 
LLTF meetings can be found on the meeting page. To 
participate in the task force, contact Evan Mickelson.
Urgency for Our Industry
An increasing number of large commercial and industrial loads are rapidly connecting to the bulk power system 
(BPS). Emerging large loads—such as data centers (including cryptocurrency and artificial intelligence applications), 
hydrogen fuel plants, and others—present unique challenges in forecasting and planning for increased demand.  
In addition to the rapid growth of emerging large loads, their electrical behavior can be distinctive and often less 
predictable than that of conventional loads. These unique characteristics pose specific risks to the BPS that need to be 
understood and managed. 
To begin understanding large loads and identifying effective pathways for their integration, NERC established the 
Large Loads Task Force (LLTF) in August 2024 and developed a work plan ; the Member Representatives Committee 
provided written input  and hosted a technical panel session  at the February 2025 Board meeting; and NERC’s Board 
issued a resolution in February 2025 directing NERC staff to develop an action plan, which will complement the work 
of the task force and provide additional structure to NERC’s efforts related to large loads integration. 
2025 Second Quarter Update 
Large Loads Action Plan Quarterly Update
Addressing an Emerging Reliability Issue
July 2025
--- PAGE 2 ---
A recent  presentation and video to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission as well as additional information about 
the LLTF, including the project scope, FAQs, work plan, and upcoming meetings, is available on NERC’s Large Loads Task 
Force web page. 
NERC Action Plan: Large Loads
Q2 2024—2026 Q4 2024—2025 Q4 2024—2025
Reliability Security Technical 
Committee’s Large Load Task 
Force (LLTF)
NERC-led Collaborative 
Industry Sessions
Q4 2024—2025
Registration Analysis
• Legal basis for
registration of large users
of the bulk power system
• Consider if Load Serving
Entities (LSE) accountable
for large load
performance
• Ability to write Reliability
Standards large loads or
LSEs would follow
Complementary Activities
• Load Modeling Working 
Group
• Coordination with EPRI, 
ESIG, and large load 
industry groups
• Industry communications 
and outreach
• Continued Incident 
Analysis and Lessons 
Learned
Load Modeling Working Group (LMWG)
The LMWG drives the advancement and utilization of 
dynamic load modeling on an interconnection-wide 
basis. The LMWG is actively engaging stakeholders 
through technical presentations and discussions focused 
on modeling large loads. Additionally, the group is 
developing a technical reference document to inform 
industry on how to model these emerging loads for 
dynamic studies. To join the working group, contact 
Hasala Dharmawardena.
Communications, Engagement, and Outreach   
NERC developed and is implementing a strategic 
engagement and communications plan that sets a 
cadence for regular updates on large loads efforts, 
identifies opportunities to expand outreach to large 
loads entities, and establishes the foundations for 
collaborative industry sessions. NERC is focused on 
expanding its engagement with the large loads industry 
through direct outreach to trade organizations and large 
load companies.  
Additionally, a discussion on large load issues is planned 
for the August Technical Session in Calgary and will 
feature representatives from the LLTF and the large 
loads industry, specifically data centers. Contact Zachary 
Greene for more information.
External Awareness and Action
NERC continues to monitor large load incidents to 
develop lessons learned and inform ongoing efforts and 
recently published  Considering Simultaneous Voltage-
Sensitive Load Reductions , which examines the risks and 
challenges posed by the increasing integration of 
voltage-sensitive large loads. Additionally, NERC is 
engaging with third-party groups that oversee their 
own large-loads stakeholder processes and 
developing plans for successful coordination.
Resources
