----- PAGE 1 -----
RELIABILITY | RESILIENCE | SECURITY  
POWERING TODAY.  PROTECTING TOMORROW.  
Implementation Plan 
Project 2026-02 Computational Loads 
Computational Load Operational Data and Communications CLO-002-1 
 
Applicable Standard(s)  
• CLO-002-1 Computational Load Operational Data and Communications 
 
Requested Retirement(s) 
• None 
 
Prerequisite Standard(s) 
These standard(s) or definitions must be approved before the Applicable Standard becomes effective:  
• Computational Load Site (Definition) 
• Computational Load Owner (Definition) 
 
Applicable Entities  
• Computational Load Owner 
• Computational Load Operator 
• Balancing Authority 
• Transmission Operator 
• Reliability Coordinator 
 
New and Modified Terms in the NERC Glossary of Terms  
This section includes all newly defined, revised, or retired terms used or eliminated in the NERC Reliability 
Standard. New or revised definitions listed below become approved when the proposed standard is approved. 
When the standard becomes effective, these defined terms will be removed from the individual standard and 
added to the Glossary.  
 
Proposed New Definition(s): 
Computational Load Operator (CLOP): The entity that operates a Computational Load Site. 
 
Computational Load Owner (CLO): The entity that owns and maintains a Computational Load Site. 
 
Computational Load Site: One or more buildings, structures, or installations at a single location that: 
1. primarily contains information technology infrastructure used for: 
• creating, executing, and delivering software applications and services;
----- PAGE 2 -----
Implementation Plan | Project 2026-02 | August 2026 2 
• artiﬁcial intelligences training, deployment, and delivery; 
• cryptocurrency mining; or 
• other computational activities at a data center; and 
2. is supplied through electrical equipment that is connected to the Bulk-Power System. 
 
Proposed Modified Definition(s): 
Operating Instruction:  A command by operating personnel responsible for the Real -time operation of the 
interconnected Bulk Electric System to change or preserve the state, status, output, or 
input of an Element of the Bulk Electric System or Facility of the Bulk Electric System or 
a Computational Load Site. (A discussion of general information and of potential options 
or alternatives to resolve Bulk Electric System operating concerns is not a command and 
is not considered an Operating Instruction.) 
Background  
An increasing number of large commercial and industrial loads are rapidly connecting to the bulk power system. 
Computational Load Sites, such as data centers (including cryptocurrency and artificial intelligence), present 
unique challenges in forecasting and planning for increased demand. Specifically, Computational Load Sites can 
be large and have unique operating characteristics, growth patterns, controls, and disturbance response 
behaviors. These characteristics can pose unique risks to the bulk power system  as detailed in the NERC 
“Characteristics and Risks of Emerging Large Loads” whitepaper in July of 2025. 
 
Existing Reliability Standards provide important precedents and framework s for maintaining the  reliability of 
the bulk power system , but they were not developed specifically for this type of large load with its unique 
characteristics. The NERC Large Loads Working Group identified gaps in existing  Reliability Standards in 
“Assessment of Gaps in Existing Practices, Requirements, and Reliability Standards for Emerging Large Loads ” 
and recommended development of new and/or updated Reliability Standards to address the unmitigated risks 
to the bulk power system . This need was also  underscored in NERC’s “Aggregated Report on NERC Level 2 
Industry Recommendation: Large Load Interconnection, Study, Commissioning, and Operations.” 
 
Therefore, Project 2026-02 is establishing Reliability Standard requirements to address the near-term essential 
actions needed to support the reliable integration of large Computational Load Sites onto the bulk power 
system. This project serves as a foundation to support C omputational Load Site integration in a manner  that 
supports a resilient and reliable bulk power system. 
 
CLO-002-1, in particular, focuses on Reliability Standard requirements associated with the provision of 
operational data and the establishment of Interpersonal Communications and protocols. 
 
General Considerations  
Reliability Standard CLO-002-1 is expected to have wide ranging impact on Computational Load O perators, as 
existing and new Computational Load Sites would be required to implement interpersonal communications 
capabilities with Balancing Authorities (BA) and Transmission Operators (TOP) . Additionally, Reliability 
Coordinators (RC), BAs, and TOPs would need to develop c omputational load-speciﬁc data speciﬁcations to 
perform their reliability functions with C omputational Load Owners, Computational Load Operators ,
----- PAGE 3 -----
Implementation Plan | Project 2026-02 | August 2026 3 
Transmission Owners (TO) , and Distribution Providers (DP)  providing any such applicable data needs.  The 
implementation plan takes into account the criticality of interpersonal communications and operational data to 
support the reliability of the bulk power system.  
 
The ERO enterprise acknowledges that Computational Load Owners are expected to be registered beginning in 
2027 based on the planned Rules of Procedure modiﬁcations and imminent FERC ﬁling. To ensure an orderly 
registration and compliance process for these entities, as well as fairness and consistency in the standard’s 
application among similar asset types, this implementation plan provides additional time for new and existing 
registered entities to come into compliance with Reliability Standard CLO-002-1 under certain circumstances.  
 
This implementation plan provides that Reliability Standard CLO -002-1 and the definitions of Computational 
Load Operator and Operating Instruction would become effective the first day of the first calendar quarter 
following regulatory approval, with a phas ed-in compliance timeline spanning twelve (12) months from the 
effective date.  
 
Entities will be required to comply with Requirements R1 -R6 six (6) months after the eﬀective date. 
Requirements R1-R6 apply to existing Registered Entities (TOP , BA, RC) and are an essential prerequisite to 
establishing and distributing operational data speciﬁcations upon which other requirements are dependent. 
Therefore, these requirements have a nearer-term implementation than other requirements applicable to new 
Registered Entities (i.e., Computational Load Owners, Computational Load Operators) or those requirements 
that are dependent on the establishment of operational data speciﬁcations.  The eﬀective date recognizes the 
comprehensive review required by the TOP , BA, and RC of its operational reliability processes and associated 
data needs in the development of these speciﬁcations. 
 
Entities will be required to comply with Requirement R7 twelve (12) months after the eﬀective date. These 
requirements depend on new Registered Entities (i.e., Computational Load Owners, Computational Load 
Operators) and the implementation of other requirements with earlier implementation contained within CLO-
002-1.  The eﬀective date recognizes the need to ﬁrst receive the speciﬁcations developed and provided by the 
TOP , BA, and RC in Requirements R1-R6 prior to the development and provision of these corresponding data 
needs for Computational Load Sites. 
 
Entities will be required to comply with the remaining requirements, Requirements R8-R15, twelve (12) months 
after the eﬀective date. These requirements depend on new Registered Entities (i.e., Computational Load 
Operators) and require the establishment of new interpersonal communications capabilities, processes, 
training, and protocols.   
 
Below is a demonstration of the phased-in compliance dates for Reliability Standard CLO-002-1:
----- PAGE 4 -----
Implementation Plan | Project 2026-02 | August 2026 4 
 
 
Figure 1: Simplified Phased-In Compliance Dates for CLO-002-1
----- PAGE 5 -----
Implementation Plan | Project 2026-02 | August 2026 5 
Effective Date and Phased-In Compliance Dates  
The effective date[s] for the proposed Reliability Standard CLO -002-1 is provided below. Where the drafting 
team identified the need for a longer implementation period for compliance with a particular section of a 
proposed Reliability Standard (i.e., an entire Requirement or a portion thereof), the additional time for 
compliance with that section is specified below. The phased- in compliance date for those particular sections 
represents the date that entities must begin to comply with that particular section of the Reliability Standard, 
even where the Reliability Standard goes into effect at an earlier date. 
 
Reliability Standard CLO-002-1 and Definitions of Computational Load Operator  and Operating 
Instruction 
Where approval by an a pplicable governmental authority is required, Reliability Standard CLO -002-1 and the 
deﬁnitions of Computational Load Operator , Computational Load Owner, Computational Load Site , and 
Operating Instruction shall become eﬀective on the ﬁrst day of the ﬁrst calendar quarter after the eﬀective date 
of the applicable governmental authority’s order approving Reliability Standard CLO -002-1, or as otherwise 
provided for by the applicable governmental authority.  
 
Where approval by an applicable governmental authority is not required, Reliability Standard CLO -002-1 and 
the deﬁnitions of Computational Load Operator and Operating Instruction shall become eﬀective on the ﬁrst 
day of the ﬁrst calendar quarter after the date the standard is adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees, or as 
otherwise provided for in that jurisdiction. 
 
Compliance Date for Reliability Standard CLO-002-1 Requirements R1 – R6 
Entities shall not be required to comply with Requirements R1, R2, R3, R4, R5, and R6 until six (6) months after 
the eﬀective date of Reliability Standard CLO-002-1.  
 
Compliance Date for Reliability Standard CLO-002-1 Requirement R7 
Entities shall not be required to comply with Requirement R7 until twelve (12) months after the eﬀective date 
of Reliability Standard CLO-002-1.  
 
Compliance Date for Reliability Standard CLO-002-1 Requirements R8 - R15 
Entities shall not be required to comply with Requirements R8, R9, R10, R11, R12, R13, R14, and R15 until twelve 
(12) months after the eﬀective date of Reliability Standard CLO-002-1.  
 
Process for Requesting an Extension from Requirement R8 - R15 Compliance 
Dates  
Each Computational Load Operator with one or more applicable Computational Load Site(s) in-service no later 
than twelve (12) months after governmental approval of this standard  may request an extension from the 
above-listed compliance dates for Requirements R 8-R15 if circumstances beyond its control prevent the 
establishment of Interpersonal Communication capability and associated protocols at  on one or more of its 
Computational Load Sites.
----- PAGE 6 -----
Implementation Plan | Project 2026-02 | August 2026 6 
To request an extension, the entity shall develop and submit to its Compliance Enforcement Authority 1 a 
request for an extension that contains at a minimum the following information:  
1.1 Identiﬁcation of the Computational Load Site(s) for which the entity requests the extension; 
1.2 A plan for establishing Interpersonal Communication capability and associated protocols and a 
timetable for completion;  
1.3 A description of the circumstances precluding the timely establishment of Interpersonal 
Communication capability and how those circumstances are beyond the control of the entity; and  
1.4 Any other information the entity deems relevant to the Compliance Enforcement Authority’s 
consideration of its request.  
 
Circumstances beyond the entity’s control may include supply chain delays associated with the procurement, 
engineering, installation, or commissioning of  Interpersonal Communication  equipment. The entity shall 
provide any information requested by the Compliance Enforcement Authority to validate the information 
provided above, including any information speciﬁed by the Compliance Enforcement Authority in a supporting 
process document. If the extension request is granted, the entity shall implement the plan in accordance with 
the provided timetable. Should additional time be required, the entity shall submit an updated request to its 
Compliance Enforcement Authority.  
 
Requests should be submitted as soon as the entity identiﬁes circumstances impeding the timely 
implementation of Reliability Standard CLO-002-1, but no later than three (3) months prior to the compliance 
date for which the entity requests an extension.  
 
1 The extension requests for a non-US Registered Entity should be implemented in a manner that is consistent with, or under the direction of, the 
applicable governmental authority or its agency in the non-US jurisdiction.
