----- PAGE 1 -----
RELIABILITY | RESILIENCE | SECURITY 
 
 
NERC | Report Title | Report Date 
I 
Public 
Public 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 5B 
Statement of Compliance Registry Criteria 
Revision 9 
 
Effective: TBD
----- PAGE 2 -----
NERC | Appendix 5B – Statement of Compliance Registry Criteria (Revision 8) |, 202X 
ii 
Public 
Public 
Table of Contents 
Statement of Compliance Registry Criteria (Revision 9) ................................................................................................. 1 
Summary...................................................................................................................................................................... 1 
Background .................................................................................................................................................................. 2 
Statement of Issue ....................................................................................................................................................... 2 
Resolution .................................................................................................................................................................... 2 
Registry Criteria ........................................................................................................................................................... 2 
Determination of Material Impact .............................................................................................................................. 6 
Limitation of responsibilities to a sub-set of Reliability Standards ............................................................................. 7
----- PAGE 3 -----
Public 
Public 
Statement of Compliance Registry Criteria (Revision 9)  
 
Summary 
This document describes how the North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) will identify organizations 
that may be candidates for Registration and assign them to the Compliance Registry. 
 
NERC and the Regional Entities
1 have the obligation to identify and register all entities that meet the criteria for 
inclusion in the Compliance Registry, as further explained in the balance of this document. 
 
Organizations will be responsible to register and to comply with approved Reliability Standards to the extent that 
they are owners, operators, and users of the Bulk Power System (BPS), perform a function listed in the functional 
types identified in Section II of this document, and are material to the Reliable Operation of the interconnected BPS 
as defined by the criteria and sections set forth in this document. NERC will apply the following principles to the 
Compliance Registry: 
 
• In order to carry out its responsibilities related to enforcement of Reliability Standards, NERC must identify 
the owners, operators, and users of the BPS who have a material impact 2 on the BPS through a Compliance 
Registry. NERC and the Regional Entities will make their best efforts to identify all owners, users and 
operators who have a material impact on the BPS in order to  develop a complete and current Compliance 
Registry list. The Compliance Registry will be updated as required and maintained on an on-going basis. 
• Organizations listed in the Compliance Registry are responsible and will be monitored for compliance with 
applicable mandatory Reliability Standards. They will be subject to NERC's and the Regional Entities’  
Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Programs. 
• NERC and Regional Entities will not monitor nor hold those not in the Compliance Registry responsible for 
compliance with the Reliability Standards. An entity which is not initially placed on the Compliance Registry, 
but which is identified subsequently as having a material impact on the BPS, will be added to the Compliance 
Registry. Such entity will not be subject to a sanction or Penalty by NERC or the Regional Entity for actions or 
inactions prior to being placed on the Compliance Registry, but  may be required to comply with a Remedial 
Action Directive or Mitigation Plan in order to become compliant with applicable Reliability Standards. After 
such entity has been placed on the Compliance Registry, it shall be responsible for complying with Reliability 
Standards and may be subject to sanctions or Penalties as well as any Remedial Act ion Directives and 
Mitigation Plans required by the Regional Entities or NERC for future violations, including any failure to follow 
a Remedial Action Directive or Mitigation Plan to become compliant with Reliability Standards. 
• Required compliance by a given organization with the Reliability Standards will begin the later of (i) inclusion 
of that organization in the Compliance Registry and (ii) approval by the Applicable Governmental Authority 
of mandatory Reliability Standards applicable to the registered entity. 
 
Entities responsible for funding NERC and the Regional Entities have been identified in the bu dget documents filed 
with FERC.
3 Presence on or absence from the Compliance Registry has no bearing on an entity’s independent 
responsibility for funding NERC and the Regional Entities. 
 
1 The term “Regional Entities” includes Cross-Border Regional Entities that have footprints in the U.S., Canada, and Mexico, as applicable. 
Applicable Governmental Authorities in Canadian jurisdictions may have adopted their own Rules of Procedure and Compliance Registry 
requirements. Registered Entities may be subject to the Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Programs (CMEP) in their respective 
jurisdictions, in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. 
2 The criteria for determining whether an entity will be placed on the Compliance Registry are set forth in the balance of this document. At 
any time a person may recommend in writing, with supporting reasons, to the Director of Compliance (or an equivalent position) that an 
organization be added to or removed from the Compliance Registry, pursuant to NERC Rules of Procedure Section 501.1.3.5. 
3 Budget documents are submitted to Applicable Governmental Authorities in Canada for information.
----- PAGE 4 -----
Statement of Compliance Registry Criteria (Revision 9) 
 
 
Public 
Public 
Background 
The initial Registration process began in January of 2006. Registration of new entities is an ongoing process. If a 
Registered Entity’s information changes, these changes must be submitted to the applicable Regional Entity(ies). 
Based on selection as the ERO, NERC’s Organization Registration program4 is the means by which NERC and the 
Regional Entities plan, manage, and execute Reliability Standard compliance oversight of owners, operators, and 
users of the BPS. Organizations listed in the Compliance Registry are subject to NERC’s and the Regional Entities’ 
Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Programs. 
 
Statement of Issue 
As the ERO, NERC intends to comprehensively and thoroughly protect the reliability of the grid. To support this goal 
NERC will include in its Compliance Registry each entity that NERC concludes can materially impact the reliability of the 
BPS. 
 
NERC will identify those entities that may need to be listed in its Compliance Registry. Identifying these organizations 
is necessary and prudent for the purpose of determining resource needs, both at the NERC and Regional Entity level, 
and for communicating with t hese entities regarding their potential responsibilities and obligations. Candidate 
entities can be identified at any time, as and when needed. The Compliance Registry is available on NERC’s website. 
 
Resolution 
The potential costs and effort of registering every organization potentially within the scope of “owner, operator, and 
user of the BPS,” while ignoring their impact upon reliability, would be disproportionate to the improvement in 
reliability that would reasonably be anticipated from doing so. 
 
NERC and the Regional Entities have identified two principles they believe are key t o the entity selection process. 
These are: 
1. There needs to be consistency between Regions and across the continent with respect to which entities are 
registered; and 
2. Any entity reasonably deemed material to the reliability of the BPS will be registered, irrespective of other 
considerations. 
 
To address the second principle the Regional Entities, working with NERC, will identify and register any entity they 
deem material to the reliability of the BPS. 
 
Registry Criteria 
In order to promote consistency, NERC and the Regional Entities use the following criteria as the basis for determining 
whether particular entities should be identified as candidates for Registration. All organizations meeting or exceeding 
the criteria will be identified as candidates. 
 
The following criteria (Sections I -V) plus the statement in Section V I will provide guidance regarding an entity’s 
Registration status: 
I. Owners, operators, or users of the BPS are candidates for Registration.5   
 
4 See NERC ERO Application; Exhibit C; Section 500 – Organization Registration and Certification. 
5 See NERC Rules of Procedure Section 501.1 NERC Compliance Registry —  NERC shall establish and maintain the NCR of the BPS  owners, 
operators, and users that are subject to approved Reliability Standards.  For purposes of this Section I, users, owners, and operators of the BPS 
includes: 1) entities that use, own, or operate Elements of the Bulk Electric System (BES) as defined in Appendix 2 of the NERC Rules of Procedure 
and NERC Glossary of Terms; as well as 2) entities otherwise defined in the Registry Criteria in this Appendix 5B.
----- PAGE 5 -----
Statement of Compliance Registry Criteria (Revision 9) 
 
 
Public 
Public 
II. Entities identified in Section I above will be categorized as Registration candidates who may be subject to 
Registration under one or more appropriate Functional Entity types based on a comparison of the functions the 
entity normally performs against the following function type definitions.6 
 
Function 
Type Acronym Definition/Discussion 
Balancing 
Authority 
BA The responsible entity that integrates resource plans ahead  of time, maintains 
Load-interchange-generation balance within a Balancing Authority Area, and 
supports Interconnection frequency in real-time. 
Computational 
Load Operator 
CLOP The entity that operates a Computational Load Site. 
 
Computational 
Load Owner 
CLO The entity that owns and maintains a Computational Load Site. 
Distribution 
Provider 
DP Provides and operates the “wires” between the transmission system and the end-
use customer. For those end- use customers who are served at transmission 
voltages, the Transmission Owner also serves as the Distribution Provider. Thus, 
the Distribution Provide
r is not defined by a specific voltage, but rather as 
performing the distribution function at any voltage. 
Note: As provided in Section III.b.1 below, a Distribution Provider entity shall be 
an Underfrequency Load Shedding (UFLS) -Only Distribution Provider if it is the 
responsible entity that owns, controls or operates UFLS Protection System(s) 
needed to implement a required UFLS program designed for the protection of the 
BES, but does not meet any of the other registration criteria for a Distribution 
Provider. 
Frequency 
Response 
Sharing Group 
FRSG A group whose members consist of two or more Balancing Authorities that 
collectively maintain, allocate, and supply operating resources required to jointly 
meet the sum of the Frequency Response Obligations of its members. 
Generator 
Operator 
GOP The entity that: 1) operates generating Facility(ies) and performs the functions of 
supplying energy and Interconnected Operations Services (Category 1 GOP); or 2) 
operates non -BES inverter based generating resources that  either have or 
contribute to  an aggregate nameplate capacity of greater than or equal to 20 
MVA, connected through a system designed primarily for delivering such capacity 
to a common point of connection at a voltage greater than or equal to 60 kV  
 
(Category 2 GOP). 
 
6 Exclusion: An entity will not be registered based on these criteria if responsibilities for compliance with approved NERC Reliability Standards 
or associated Requirements including reporting have been transferred by written agreement to another entity that has registered for the 
appropriate function for the transferred responsibilities, including bilateral agreements and Sections 501, 507, and 508 of the NERC Rules of 
Procedure.
----- PAGE 6 -----
Statement of Compliance Registry Criteria (Revision 9) 
 
 
Public 
Public 
Function 
Type Acronym Definition/Discussion 
Generator 
Owner 
GO The entity that: 1) owns and maintains generating Facility(ies) (Category 1 GO); or 
2) owns and maintains non-BES inverter based generating resources that either 
have or contribute to an aggregate nameplate capacity of greater than or equal to 
20 MVA, connected through a system designed primarily for delivering such 
capacity to a common point of connection at a voltage greater than or equal to 60 
kV (Category 2 GO). 
Planning 
Authority/ 
Planning 
Coordinator 
PA/PC The responsible entity that coordinates and integrates transmission Facilities and 
service plans, resource plans, and Protection Systems. 
Reliability 
Coordinator 
RC The entity that is the highest level of authority who is responsible for the Reliable 
Operation of the BES, has the Wide Area view of the BES, and has the operating 
tools, processes and procedures, including the authority to prevent or mitigate 
emergency o perating situations in both next -day analysis and real -time 
operations. The Reliability Coordinator has the purview that is broad enough to 
enable the calculation of Interconnection Reliability Operating Limits, which may 
be based on the operating paramete
rs of transmission systems beyond any 
Transmission Operator’s vision. 
Regulation 
Reserve Sharing 
Group 
RRSG A group whose members consist of two or more Balancing Authorities that 
collectively maintain, allocate, and supply the Regulating Reserve required for all 
member Balancing Authorities to use in meeting applicable regulating standards. 
Reserve Sharing 
Group 
RSG A group whose members consist of two or more Balancing Authorities that 
collectively maintain, allocate, and supply O perating Reserves required for each 
Balancing Authority’s use in recovering from contingencies within the group. 
Scheduling energy from an Adjacent Balancing Authority to aid recovery need not 
constitute reserve sharing provided the transaction is ramped in over a period the 
supplying party could reasonably be expected to load generation in (e.g., ten 
minutes). If the transaction is ramped in more quickly (e.g., between zero and ten 
minutes), then, for the purposes of recovery from a Reportable  Balancing 
Contingency Event, the areas become a Reserve Sharing Group. 
Resource 
Planner 
RP The entity that develops a long-term (generally one year and beyond) plan for the 
resource adequacy of specific Loads (customer demand and energy requirements) 
within a Planning Authority area. 
Transmission 
Owner 
TO The entity that owns and maintains transmission Facilities. 
Transmission 
Operator 
TOP The entity responsible  for the reliability of its local transmission system and 
operates or directs the operations of the transmission Facilities.
----- PAGE 7 -----
Statement of Compliance Registry Criteria (Revision 9) 
 
 
Public 
Public 
Function 
Type Acronym Definition/Discussion 
Transmission 
Planner 
TP The entity that develops a long-term (generally one year and beyond) plan for the 
reliability (adequacy) of the interconnected bulk electric transmission systems 
within its portion of the Planning Authority area. 
Transmission 
Service Provider 
TSP The entity that administers the transmission tariff and provides Transmission 
Service to Transmission Customers under applicable Transmission Service 
agreements. 
 
III. Entities identified in Section II above as being subject to Registration as a Distribution Provider , Computational 
Load Operator, or Computational Load Owner should be included in the Compliance Registry for these functions 
only if they meet any of the criteria listed below: 
III(a)   Distribution Provider: 
III.a.1 Distribution Provider system serving >75 MW of peak Load that is directly connected to the BES;7 or 
III.a.2 Distribution Provider is the responsible entity that owns, controls, or operates Facilities that are part 
of any of the following Protection Systems or programs designed, installed, and operated for the 
protection of the BES:
8 
• a required Undervoltage Load Shedding (UVLS) program and/or 
• a required Special Protection System or Remedial Action Scheme and/or 
• a required transmission Protection System; or 
III.a.3 Distribution Provider that is responsible for providing services related to Nuclear Plant Interface 
Requirements (NPIRs) pursuant to an executed agreement; or 
III.a.4 Distribution Provider with field switching personnel identified as performing unique tasks associated 
with the Transmission Operator’s restoration plan that are outside of their normal tasks. 
III(b)   Distribution Provider with UFLS-Only assets (referred to as “UFLS-Only Distribution Provider”) 
III.b.1 UFLS- Only Distribution Provider does not meet any of the other registration criteria in Sections 
III(a)(1)-(4) for a Distribution Provider; and 
III.b.2 UFLS- Only Distribution Provider is the responsible entity that owns, controls, or operates UFLS 
Protection System(s) needed to implement a required UFLS Program designed for the protection of 
the BES. 
The Reliability Standards applicable to UFLS-Only Distribution Providers are: (1) any version of PRC-005 and 
PRC-006 applicable to UFLS-Only Distribution Providers, (2) any regional Reliability Standard whose purpose 
is to develop or establish a UFLS Program, and (3) any Reliability Standard that lists UFLS -Only Distribution 
Provider in the applicability section. Reliability Standards that apply to Distribution Providers will not apply 
to UFLS-Only Distribution Providers, unless explicitly stated in the applicability section of these Reliability 
Standards and in future revisions and/or versions. 
 
7 Ownership, control or operation of UFLS Protection System(s) needed to implement a required UFLS Program designed for the protection of 
the BES does not affect an entity’s eligibility for registration pursuant to III.a.1. 
8 As used in Section III.a.2, “protection of the Bulk Electric System” means protection to prevent instability, Cascading, or uncontrolled 
separation of the BES and not for local voltage issues (UVLS) or local line loading management (Special Protection System) that are 
demonstrated to be contained within a local area.
----- PAGE 8 -----
Statement of Compliance Registry Criteria (Revision 9) 
 
 
Public 
Public 
III(c) Computational Load Owner or Operator: 
III.c.1  Computational Load Owner of a Computational Load Site with a total connected Load greater than 
or equal to 50 MW that is supplied through electrical equipment connected at a voltage level greater 
than or equal to 100 kV from one or more points of connection. 
III.c.2 Computational Load Operator of a Computational Load Site with a total connected Load greater 
than or equal to 50 MW that is supplied through electrical equipment connected at a voltage level 
greater than or equal to 100 kV from one or more points of connection. 
 
IV. Joint Registration Organization, Coordinated Functional Registration and applicable Member Registration. 
Pursuant to FERC’s directive in paragraph 107 of Order No. 693, NERC’s rules pertaining to joint Registrations and 
Joint Registration Organizations, as well as Coordinated Functional Registrations, are now found in Section 501, 
507, and 508 of the NERC Rules of Procedure. 
V. If NERC or a Regional Entity encounters an organization that is not listed in the Compliance Registry, but which 
should be subject to the Reliability Standards, NERC or the Regional Entity is obligated and will initiate actions to 
add that organization to the Compliance Registry, subject to that organization’s right to challenge as provided in 
Section 500 of NERC’s Rules of Procedure. 
 
Determination of Material Impact9 
An entity that does not meet (i.e., falls below) the criteria may nevertheless be registered if it can be demonstrated 
that the entity has a material impact on the reliability of the BPS . Similarly, an entity that meets the criteria may be 
excluded if it can be demonstrated to NERC that the entity does not have a material impact on the reliability of the 
BPS. Such Registration decisions regarding materiality must be made by the NERC -led Registration Review Panel in 
accordance with Section III(D) of Appendix 5A to the NERC Rules of Procedure. In order to  ensure a consistent 
approach to assessing materiality, a non -exclusive set of factors (“materiality test”) for consideration is identified 
below; however, only a sub -set of these factors, or other additional factors, may be applicable to a particular 
functional registration category or specific entity, as appropriate: 
1. Is the entity specifically identified in the emergency operation plans and/or restoration plans of an associated 
Reliability Coordinator, Balancing Authority, Generator Operator or Transmission Operator? 
2. Will intentional or inadvertent removal of an Element owned or operated by the entity, or a common mode 
failure of two Elements as identified in the Reliability Standards (for example, loss of two Elements as a result 
of a breaker failure), lead to a relia bility issue on another entity’s system (such as a neighboring entity’s 
Element exceeding an applicable rating, or loss of non-consequential load due to a single contingency)? 
Conversely, will such contingencies on a neighboring entity’s system result in issues for Reliability Standards 
compliance on the system of the entity in question? 
3. Can the normal operation, misoperation or malicious use of the entity’s cyber assets cause a detrimental 
impact (e.g., by limiting the operational alternatives) on the operational reliability of an associated Balancing 
Authority, Generator Operator or Transmission Operator? 
4. Can the normal operation, misoperation, or malicious use of the entity’s Protection Systems (including UFLS, 
UVLS, Special Protection System, Remedial Action Schemes and other Protection Systems protecting BES 
Facilities) cause an adverse impact on the operational reliability of any associated Balancing Authority, 
 
9 The Determination of Material Impact applies when an entity seeks a NERC-led Registration Review Panel to review its request for examination 
of registration based on material impact.  As stated in Appendix 5A, “[t]he Panel shall also include a review of individual and aggregate system-
wide risks to, and considerations of, reliability of the BPS, as well as the BES Definition, as applicable .” Appendix 5A, Section III(D). A ny such 
request will be reviewed on a case by case basis in accordance with the Panel procedures set forth in Appendix 5A.
----- PAGE 9 -----
Statement of Compliance Registry Criteria (Revision 9) 
 
 
Public 
Public 
Generator Operator or Transmission Operator, or the automatic load shedding programs of a PC or TP (UFLS, 
UVLS)? 
 
Limitation of responsibilities to a sub-set of Reliability Standards 
NERC may limit the compliance obligations of (1) a given entity registered for a particular function or (2) a similarly 
situated class of entities, as warranted based on the particular facts and circumstances, to a sub-set list of Reliability 
Standards (wh ich may specify Requirements/sub -Requirements). If NERC establishes a sub -set list for similarly 
situated class of entities, NERC will post the eligibility criteria and sub-set list of applicable Reliability Standards to the 
Registration and Certification page of the NERC Website.
