----- PAGE 1 -----
RELIABILITY | RESILIENCE | SECURITY  
POWERING TODAY.  PROTECTING TOMORROW.  
Implementation Plan 
Project 2026-02 Computational Loads 
Computational Load Protection Coordination and Disturbance Monitoring 
CLO-003-1 
 
Applicable Standard(s)  
• CLO-003-1 Computational Load Protection Coordination and Disturbance Monitoring 
 
Requested Retirement(s) 
• None 
 
Prerequisite Standard(s) 
These standard(s) or definitions must be approved before the Applicable Standard becomes effective:  
• Computational Load Site (Definition) 
• Computational Load Owner (Definition) 
 
Applicable Entities  
• Computational Load Owner 
• Transmission Owner 
• Distribution Provider 
• Generator Owner 
 
New Terms in the NERC Glossary of Terms  
This section includes all newly defined, revised, or retired terms used or eliminated in the NERC Reliability 
Standard. New or revised definitions listed below become approved when the proposed standard is approved. 
When the standard becomes effective, these defined terms will be removed from the individual standard and 
added to the Glossary.  
 
Proposed New Definition(s): 
Computational Load Owner (CLO): The entity that owns and maintains a Computational Load Site. 
 
Computational Load Site: One or more buildings, structures, or installations at a single location that: 
1. primarily contains information technology infrastructure used for: 
• creating, executing, and delivering software applications and services; 
• artiﬁcial intelligences training, deployment, and delivery; 
• cryptocurrency mining; or
----- PAGE 2 -----
Implementation Plan | Project 2026-02 | August 2026 2 
• other computational activities at a data center; and 
2. is supplied through electrical equipment that is connected to the Bulk-Power System. 
 
Background  
An increasing number of large commercial and industrial loads are rapidly connecting to the bulk power system. 
Computational Load Sites, such as data centers (including cryptocurrency and artificial intelligence), present 
unique challenges in forecasting and planning for increased demand. Specifically Computational Load Sites can 
be large and have unique operating characteristics, growth patterns, controls, and disturbance response 
behaviors. These characteristics can pose unique risks to the bulk power system  as detailed in the NERC 
“Characteristics and Risks of Emerging Large Loads” whitepaper in July of 2025. 
 
Existing Reliability Standards provide important precedents and framework for maintaining the reliability of the 
bulk power system , but they were not developed specifically for this type of large load with its unique 
characteristics. The NERC Large Loads Working Group identified gaps in existing  Reliability Standards in 
“Assessment of Gaps in Existing Practices, Requirements, and Reliability Standards for Emerging Large Loads ” 
white paper and recommended development of new and/or updated  Reliability Standards to address the 
unmitigated risks to the bulk power system. This need was also underscored in NERC’s “Aggregated Report on 
NERC Level 2 Industry Recommendation: Large Load Interconnection, Study, Commissioning, and Operations”. 
Therefore, Project 2026-02 is establishing Reliability Standard requirements to address the near-term essential 
actions needed to support the reliable integration of large Computational Load Sites onto the bulk power 
system. This project serves as a foundation to support C omputational Load Site integration in a manner  that 
supports a resilient and reliable bulk power system. 
 
Reliability Standard  CLO-003-1, in particular, focuses on Reliability Standard requirements associated with 
protection coordination and the establishment of disturbance monitoring equipment at Computational Load 
Sites.  
 
General Considerations 
Reliability Standard CLO -003-1 is expected to have wide ranging impact on Computational Load Owners, as 
existing and new Computational Load Sites would be required to have Disturbance Monitoring Equipment and 
supporting processes for protection coordination. In cases where the Computational Load Owner does not own 
the main power transformer(s) that supplies a Computational Load Site , the Transmission Owner, Distribution 
Provider, or Generator Owner would be required to have Disturbance Monitoring Equipment to support fault 
recording and dynamic disturbance recording data.  A graduated approach to implementation recognizes that 
progress will be made while attempting to minimize any potential signiﬁcant impact to the entities. The 
implementation plan takes into account scheduling outages needed to implement fault recording and dynamic 
disturbance recording capability, as well as the time needed to establish and implement processes for protection 
coordination. The implementation plan accounts for any increase in requests to vendors to acquire  this 
technology or capability that could impact implementation timelines for the respective entities. 
 
The ERO enterprise acknowledges that Computational Load Owners are expected to be registered beginning in 
2027 based on the planned Rules of Procedure modiﬁcations and imminent FERC ﬁling. To ensure an orderly 
registration and compliance process for these entities, as well as fairness and consistency in the standard’s
----- PAGE 3 -----
Implementation Plan | Project 2026-02 | August 2026 3 
application among similar asset types, this implementation plan provides additional time for new and existing 
registered entities to come into compliance with Reliability Standard CLO-003-1 under certain circumstances.  
 
This implementation plan provides that Reliability Standard CLO-003-1 would become eﬀective the ﬁrst day of 
the ﬁrst calendar quarter after regulatory approval, with a phased -in compliance timeline spanning up to 36 
months following the eﬀective date, depending on the date the Computational Load Site was placed into service. 
 
Below is a demonstration of the phased-in compliance dates for Reliability Standard CLO-003-1: 
 
 
Figure 1: Simplified Phased-In Compliance Dates for CLO-003-1 
 
Entities will be required to comply with Requirements R1 through R8 36 months following the eﬀective date of 
Reliability Standard CLO-003-1 if the Computational Load Sites were in service before the eﬀective date of the 
standard. If the Computational Load Sites entered service after the eﬀective date of the standard, entities will 
be required to comply with Requirements R1 through R8 15 months following the eﬀective date of the standard, 
or the in service date, whichever is later. 
 
As an example, assume the eﬀective date of the CLE-003-1 is April 1, 2027: 
• For Computational Load Sites in service before April 1, 2027, entities shall comply with Requirements 
R1 through R8 by April 1, 2030.  
• For Computational Load Sites in service after April 1, 2027, but on or before July 1, 2028, entities shall 
comply with Requirements R1 through R8 by July 1, 2028.  
• For Computational Load Sites in service after July 1, 2028, entities shall comply with Requirements R1 
through R8 on the in-service date. 
 
If an entity has a n existing Computational Load Site or a Computational Load Site in the advanced stages of 
development and is unable to comply with the Requirements within the provided timeframe due to 
circumstances beyond its control, it may request an extension in accordance with the process set forth in this 
implementation plan.
----- PAGE 4 -----
Implementation Plan | Project 2026-02 | August 2026 4 
Entities shall not be required to comply with Requirements R9 and R10 until nine (9) months after the eﬀective 
date of Reliability Standard CLO -003-1. These requirements depend on new Registered Entities (i.e., 
Computational Load Owners) and coordination with existing Registered Entities (Generator Owner, Transmission 
Owner, Distribution Provider).   
 
 
 
Effective Date and Phased-In Compliance Dates  
The effective date[s] for the proposed Reliability Standard  CLO-003-1 is provided below. Where the drafting 
team identified the need for a longer implementation period for compliance with a particular section of a 
proposed Reliability Standard (i.e., an entire Requirement or a portion thereof), the additional time for 
compliance with that section is specified below. The phased- in compliance date for those particular sections 
represents the date that entities must begin to comply with that particular section of the Reliability Standard, 
even where the Reliability Standard goes into effect at an earlier date. 
 
Reliability Standard CLO-003-1  
Where approval by an applicable governmental authority is required, Reliability Standard CLO -003-1 and 
deﬁnitions of Computational Load Site and Computational Load Owner shall become eﬀective on the ﬁrst day 
of the ﬁrst calendar quarter after the eﬀective date of the applicable governmental authority’s order approving 
the standard, or as otherwise provided for by the applicable governmental authority.  
 
Where approval by an applicable governmental authority is not required, the standard shall become eﬀective 
on the ﬁrst day of the ﬁrst calendar quarter after the date the standard is adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees, 
or as otherwise provided for in that jurisdiction. 
 
Compliance Date for Reliability Standard CLO-003-1 Requirements R1 – R8 
For Computational Load Sites in service1 on or before the eﬀective date: 
Entities shall not be required to comply with Requirements R1 through R8 until 36 months following the eﬀective 
date of CLO-003-1.  
 
For Computational Load Sites in service after the eﬀective date: 
Entities shall not be required to comply with Requirements R1 through R8 until 15 months following the eﬀective 
date of the standard or the in-service date, whichever is later.  
 
Compliance Date for Reliability Standard CLO-003-1 Requirements R9 and R10 
Entities shall not be required to comply with Requirements R9 and R10 until nine (9) months after the eﬀective 
date of Reliability Standard CLO -003-1. These requirements depend on new Registered Entities (i.e., 
Computational Load Owners) and coordination with existing Registered Entities (Generator Owner, Transmission 
Owner, Distribution Provider).   
 
 
1 Consistent with common usage, in -service date means the Computational Load Site is fully ready and available for its intended specific use, 
including, but not limited to completion of its interconnection.
----- PAGE 5 -----
Implementation Plan | Project 2026-02 | August 2026 5 
Process for Requesting an Extension from  Requirement R1 - R8 Compliance 
Dates  
Each Entity with one or more applicable Computational Load Site s in service no later than twelve (12) months 
after governmental approval of this standard may request an extension from the above-listed compliance dates 
for Requirements R1-R8 if circumstances beyond its control prevent the installation of Disturbance Monitoring 
Equipment on one or more of the Computational Load Sites. 
  
To request an extension, the entity shall develop and submit to its Compliance Enforcement Authority2 a request 
for an extension that contains at a minimum the following information:  
1.1 Identiﬁcation of the Computational Load Site(s) for which the entity requests the extension; 
1.2 A plan for installing the Disturbance Monitoring Equipment and a timetable for completion;  
1.3 A description of the circumstances precluding the timely installation of Disturbance Monitoring 
Equipment and how those circumstances are beyond the control of the entity; and  
1.4 Any other information the entity deems relevant to the Compliance Enforcement Authority’s 
consideration of its request.  
 
Circumstances beyond the entity’s control may include supply chain delays associated with the procurement, 
engineering, installation, or commissioning of disturbance monitoring equipment, inability to secure scheduled 
outages, or other exceptional circumst ances outside the entity’s control. The entity shall provide any 
information requested by the Compliance Enforcement Authority to validate the information provided above, 
including any information speciﬁed by the Compliance Enforcement Authority in a supp orting process 
document. If the extension request is granted, the entity shall implement the plan in accordance with the 
provided timetable. Should additional time be required, the entity shall submit an updated request to its 
Compliance Enforcement Authority.  
 
Requests should be submitted as soon as the entity identiﬁes circumstances impeding the timely 
implementation of Reliability Standard CLO-003-1, but no later than three (3) months prior to the compliance 
date for which the entity requests an extension.  
 
2 The extension requests for a non-US Registered Entity should be implemented in a manner that is consistent with, or under the direction of, the 
applicable governmental authority or its agency in the non-US jurisdiction.
