----- PAGE 1 -----
RELIABILITY | RESILIENCE | SECURITY  
POWERING TODAY.  PROTECTING TOMORROW.  
Computational Loads 
Proposed Rules of Procedure Revisions Summary 
August 19, 2026 
 
Background 
An increasing number of large commercial and industrial loads are rapidly connecting to the bulk power system (BPS). 
Emerging large loads , such as data centers (including cryptocurrency and artiﬁcial intelligence applications)  with 
signiﬁcant information technology uses present unique challenges in BPS planning and operations. In addition to the 
rapid growth of such emerging computational loads, their electrical behavior can be distinctive and often less predictable 
than that of conventional loads. These unique characteristics pose risks to the BPS that need to be understood and 
managed. 
  
To expeditiously address these risks, NERC initiated the Large Load s Action Plan.1 Consistent with this plan , the NERC 
Large Loads Working Group (a subgroup of the Reliability and Security Technical Committee) released its second white 
paper on March 11, 2026, titled “Assessment of Gaps in Existing Practices, Requirements, and Reliability Standards for 
Emerging Large Loads.” The paper found that the existing NERC Reliability Standards, as well as industry processes and 
requirements, are inadequate for the reliable integration of emerging large loads onto the BPS. The white paper 
recommendations include updates to registration  criteria, Reliability Standards, processes, and requirements.   NERC ’s 
March 17, 2026 public report , “NERC Aggregated Report on NERC Level 2 Industry Recommendation: Large Load 
Interconnection, Study, Commissioning, and Operations ”, wit h r esu lt s fr om the  Le v e l 2 Alert, made similar ﬁndings.  
NERC presented its plan to update its NERC Registry Criteria  and Reliability Standards based on the technical analysis 
underlying these publications at NERC’s Large Loads Technical Conference held on February 24-25, 2026. 
 
In addition, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) directed NERC to submit proposed registry criteria and an 
initial set of Reliability Standards for computational loads by December 31, 2026.
2 This directive is consistent with NERC’s 
Large Loads Action Plan timeline and demonstrates FERC’s support of addressing these risks in a timely manner. 
 
Proposed NERC Registry Criteria 
Based on comments received from the April posting of initial proposed criteria,3 NERC is proposing additional revisions, 
including two new functional entity types. To appropriately identify the entities that are part of th ese functional entity 
types, called “Computational Load Owner” and “ Computational Load Operator”, NERC develops criteria, called “NERC 
Registry Criteria”, that clearly delineate the threshold or characteristics that make an entity qualify for registration for 
the functional entity type to which certain mandatory and enforceable Reliability Standards
4 will apply. 
  
As part of the process for developing the NERC Registry Criteria, NERC solicits public comment  on the criteria prior to  
other necessary approvals from the NERC Board of Trustees and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. The NERC 
Registry Criteria are included in Appendix 5B of the NERC Rules of Procedure, so NERC is posting clean and redline 
versions of the proposed Appendix 5B, along with associated changes in Appendix 2 and Appendix 5A, for a n additional 
 
1  More information on the Large Loads Action Plan is available on the Large Loads Action Plan web page. 
2  See the FERC Order Directing the North American Electric Reliability Corporation to file Reliability Standard(s) Pertaining to Computational 
Load Integration in Docket No. RD26-7-000, issued July 16, 2026. 
3  NERC posted its initial proposed registry criteria for a 45-day comment period from April 1 through May 15, 2026. 
4  The Reliability Standards for this new functional entity are currently under development through Project 2026-02 – Computational Loads. 
Stakeholders interested in participating in the standards development process should contact Senior Standards Developer Laura Anderson (via 
email) or subscribe to the Project 2026-02 mailing list.
----- PAGE 2 -----
2 
public comment period  for 30 days  from August 19, 2026 until September 18, 2026. Comments must be submitted 
electronically to ROPcomments@nerc.net.  
 
Summary of Revisions 
To add new functional entiti es, NERC must revise Rules of Procedure Appendix 2  ( D e ﬁ n i ti o n s  U s e d  i n  t h e  R u l e s  o f  
Procedure); Appendix 5A (Organization Registration and Certiﬁcation Manual); and Appendix 5B ( Statement of 
Compliance Registry Criteria). The following provides a summary of the proposed revisions to each of these appendices: 
 
Appendix 2  (Definitions Used in the Rules of Procedure)  
Appendix 2 to the NERC Rules of Procedure includes deﬁned terms used throughout the Rules of Procedure. The 
proposed revisions add the following three terms: 
• “Computational Load Operator” means the entity that operates a Computational Load Site. 
• “Computational Load Owner” means the entity that owns and maintains a Computational Load Site. 
• “Computational Load Site” means one or more buildings, structures, or installations at a single location 
that 
1) Primarily contains information technology infrastructure used for: 
• creating, executing, and delivering software applications and services;  
• artificial intelligence training, deployment, and delivery;  
• cryptocurrency mining; or  
• other computational activities at a data center; and 
2) is supplied through electrical equipment that is connected to the BPS. 
 
Appendix 5A  (Organization Registration and Certification Manual)  
Appendix 5A contains the process used by NERC and the Regional Entities to register certain functional entity types to 
which mandatory and enforceable Reliability Standards apply. The proposed revisions to Appendix 5A add 
“Computational Load Owner (CLO)” and “Computational Load Operator (CLOP)”as types of entities that are required to 
register on the NERC Compliance Registry. In addition, proposed revisions to Appendix 5A include minor administrative 
corrections. 
 
Appendix 5B (Statement of Compliance Registry Criteria)  
Appendix 5B contains the speciﬁc criteria NERC and the Regional Entities use to identify which organizations may be 
candidates for registration for functional entity types. In accordance with the Federal Power Act, NERC must identify the 
owners, operators, and users of the BPS who have a material impact on the BPS . To that end, the proposed revisions in 
Appendix 5B add  threshold criteria to identify those organizations that should be registered as Computational Load 
Owners and Operators, summarized below: 
• Computational Load Owner or Operator of a Computational Load Site with a total connected Load greater than 
or equal to 50 MW that is supplied through electrical equipment connected at a voltage level greater than or 
equal to 100 kV from one or more points of connection. 
Candidates must meet all the criteria in the proposed revisions in Appendix 5B in order to be registered as a 
Computational Load Owner or a Computational Load Operator . In some circumstances, a candidate may be considered 
as both a Computational Load Owner and a Computational Load Operator and would be registered for both functions. 
Please note that this summary is provided for convenience, but stakeholders should review and comment on the 
proposed language in the Rules of Procedure  posted on the Proposed Changes to Rules of Procedure web page. For 
further assistance on the Rules of Procedure comment process, please contact Marisa Hecht via email or at 404-446-
9620.
