----- PAGE 1 -----
RELIABILITY | RESILIENCE | SECURITY   
POWERING TODAY.  PROTECTING TOMORROW.  
POWERING TODAY.  PROTECTING TOMORROW.  
Frequently Asked Questions 
Computational Loads: Registry Criteria and Project 2026-02 Standards  
 
An increasing number of large commercial and industrial loads are rapidly connecting to the Bulk-Power System 
(BPS). Computational loads, such as data centers (including cryptocurrency and artiﬁcial intelligence), present 
unique challenges in forecasting and planning for increased demand. Through extensive analysis, report 
development, and ongoing engagement, NERC det ermined that it must act now to  integrate computational 
loads and mitigate the risks associated with them. To achieve this, NERC developed its Large Loads Action Plan. 
Through a three-pronged approach of technical insights, registration criteria for computational loads, and new 
Reliability Standards, NERC and stakeholders can ensure new computational loads operate reliably and securely 
when connected to the grid.  
 
This Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) document is intended to help stakeholders understand the proposed 
Reliability Standards CLO-001-1, CL O-002-1, and CL O-003-1 being developed under Project 2026- 02 
Computational Loads, as well as the proposed updates to registry criteria as outlined in the Rules of Procedure 
(ROP). The FAQ summarizes the purpose of the project, the current standards framework, key process 
questions, and topics that may be addressed through future standards development work. 
 
In addition, this document addresses some commonly asked questions regarding the proposed registry criteria 
in the NERC ROP and the registration process to help stakeholders understand the relationship between the 
development of Reliability Standards in Project 2026-02 and the NERC registry criteria for Computational Load 
Owners (CLOs) and Computational Load Operators (CLOPs). However, the Project 2026-02 drafting team (DT) 
emphasizes that this information is provided for general understanding of the application of the registry 
criteria, and that all registration determinations for individual entities that may meet the new registry criteria 
(once eﬀective) will occur through the regist ration process conducted in coordination with the appropriate 
Regional Entity(ies), NERC, and the entity, based on its individual facts and circumstances. 
 
Reliability Standards and Registration 
What Are Reliability Standards? 
Reliability Standards deﬁne reliability requirements for planning and operating the North American Bulk-
Power System, as required under  Section 215 of the Federal Power Act . As the Electric Reliability 
Organization (ERO), NERC develops standards that are subject to review and approval by the Federal Energy 
Regulatory Commission (FERC). Once approved, standards are mandatory and enforceable for registered 
entities. 
 
NERC develops Reliability Standards using an industry-driven development process that is open to everyone 
aﬀected by grid reliability. This public process is transparent, demonstrates a consensus for each standard, 
fairly balances the interests of all stakeholders, provides reasonable notice and opportunity for comment, 
and enables timely standards development.
----- PAGE 2 -----
FAQ for Project 2026-02 2 
What is Registration? 
Registration identiﬁes and registers BPS owners, operators, and users that are responsible for performing 
speciﬁed reliability functions to which mandatory NERC Reliability Standards apply. The requirements and 
activities for organization registration are detailed in Section 500 (Organization Registration and 
Certiﬁcation) and Appendices 5A and 5B of the FERC-approved NERC ROP. 
 
The registration process evaluates candidate organizations (entities) to determine what reliability function 
they perform. When this analysis results in the candidate being added to the  NERC Compliance Registry, 
the candidate is also matched to their associated reliability function (s). Once placed on the Compliance 
Registry, the entity is responsible for complying with the approved mandatory Reliability Standard(s) 
associated with their registered function(s). 
 
Project Scope and Purpose 
What Are Computational Loads? 
Computational loads generally refer s to loads , such as data centers , that primarily contain information 
technology infrastructure supporting computational activities like cryptocurrency mining, artiﬁcial 
intelligence training or inference, and cloud-based computing and storage. A “Computational Load Site” is 
oﬃcially being deﬁned as a new term in the NERC Glossary of Terms used in Reliability Standards as part of 
Project 2026-02, and in parallel, NERC is proposing the term for inclusion in  Appendix 2A of the ROP in 
support of the  registry criteria and alignment with the project work.  This proposed deﬁnition of 
Computational Load Site is “One or more buildings, structures, or installations at a single location that: 
1) primarily contains information technology infrastructure used for: 
• creating, executing, and delivering software applications and services; 
• artiﬁcial intelligence training, deployment, and delivery; 
• cryptocurrency mining; or 
• other computational activities at a data center; and 
2) is supplied through electrical equipment that is connected to the BPS.” 
 
What is the purpose of Project 2026-02 on computational loads? 
Project 2026- 02 is developing NERC Reliability Standard requirements to address near-term essential 
actions needed to support the  reliable integration of Computational Load Sites onto the BPS. This 
foundational project will support computational load integration while maintaining a resilient and reliable 
BPS.
----- PAGE 3 -----
FAQ for Project 2026-02 3 
Why are new Reliability Standards needed? 
Computational Load Sites can be large and have unique operating characteristics, growth patterns, controls, 
and disturbance response behaviors. These characteristics can pose unique risks to the BPS, as detailed in 
the Large Loads Task Force “Characteristics and Risks of Emerging Large Loads” white paper in July of 2025. 
Existing Reliability Standards  applicable to owners, operators, and users of the BPS, provide important 
precedents and framework for maintaining the reliability of the BPS, but were not developed speciﬁcally 
for this type of large load user with its unique characteristics. 
 
The NERC Large Load s Working Group (LLWG) then identiﬁed gaps in existing Reliability Standards in the 
“Assessment of Gaps in Existing Practices, Requirements, and Reliability Standards for Emerging Large 
Loads” white paper and recommended development of new and/or updated Reliability Standards to 
address the unmitigated risks to the BPS. This need was also underscored in NERC’s Aggregated Report on 
NERC Level 2 Industry Recommendation: Large Load Interconnection, Study, Commissioning, and 
Operations. 
 
Lastly, on July 16, 2026,  FERC issued order in Docket No. RD26- 7-000 directing NERC to ﬁle Reliability 
Standard updates, any associated NERC Glossary of Terms,  and registry criteria updates pertaining to 
computational load integration by December 31, 2026.
1 NERC previously ﬁled its Action Plan reﬂecting its 
intent to submit these by the end of 2026, for FERC consideration. The successful completion of NERC 
Reliability Standards being developed under  Project 2026- 02 is intended to satisfy the December 31 
deadline in FERC’s order. 
 
What is the standard development timeframe for Project 2026-02? 
Project 2026-02 is being developed on an expedited timeline. As discussed in NERC’s ﬁlings with FERC, the 
timeline posted at NERC’s Large Load s Action Plan  webpage is consistent with FERC’s July 16, 2026 
directive.2 Speciﬁcally, the DT is targeting the development of highly eﬀective, industry -supported, and 
foundational Reliability Standards that are ready to be submitted to the NERC Board of Trustees (Board) for 
approval by the end of 2026 . In addition, the Order also directed NERC to develop revisions to its ROP , 
which is necessary for the registration of computational load entities, and to submit the proposed revisions 
by December 31, 2026. 
 
As part of this timeline, NERC is expected to propose draft Reliability Standards and registration criteria for 
public comment on August 19, 2026. In December 2026, NERC will seek Board approval of the registry 
criteria, glossary terms, Reliability Standards and submit them to FERC by December 31. 
 
It is important to note that this expedited schedule leverages existing authority under the NERC standards 
development process. The project  has, and is expected to continue, to proceed through the applicable 
standards process steps, including Standard Authorization Request (SAR) development which occurred 
 
1 Reliability Standard(s) Pertaining to Computational Load Integration, 196 FERC ¶ 61,031 (2026) (directing “an informational filing containing a 
workplan detailing the next steps in the standards development process for additional Reliability Standards pertaining to computational load 
integration.” by March 1, 2027). 
2 FERC Docket No. RM26-4-000 and Docket No. EL25-49-000.
----- PAGE 4 -----
FAQ for Project 2026-02 4 
early in 2026 , formal development, extensive industry outreach, stakeholder comment, consideration of 
comments, balloting, Board, and applicable regulatory approvals. NERC will also seek waivers to shorten 
comment periods to meet the timeline. 
 
What is the Drafting Team’s strategy in developing highly-eﬀective and industry-supported Reliability 
Standards? 
In addition to focusing on the Ten Benchmarks of an Excellent Reliability Standard, the DT quickly aligned 
on a three-pillar strategy to deliver highly-eﬀective and industry-supported Reliability Standards for Project 
2026-02. These entail: 1) setting the foundation to support computational load integration with the BPS in 
a manner that supports reliability; 2) leveraging existing Reliability Standards with essential actions  
applicable to integrating comparable facilities , such as transmission and generation facilities; and 3) 
focusing on immediate needs to allow ﬂexibility at a time where NERC, stakeholders, and policy makers are 
continuing to ascertain the full scope of needs to reliably integrate computational loads interconnected 
with the BPS.  
1. Set the Foundation  
While computational load users are new to NERC and Reliability Standards, their power electronic-
based equipment has similar attributes and characteristics to other facilities operating 
interconnected to the BPS. Additionally, many of the essential, process -related reliability actions 
used by existing NERC entities to reliably integrate other types of comparable facilities onto the BPS, 
such as transmission and generation facilities, are translatable to the reliable integration of 
Computational Load Sites. These existing entities, such as operators and planners, have extensive 
experience applying NERC Reliability Standard requirements in areas like data exchange, modeling, 
protection setting coordination, and real-time communication, which will provide support to new 
computational load user entities.  The DT’s strategy seeks to leverage these existing , translatable 
processes to set a foundation of essential initial Reliability Standards to integrate computational 
loads. 
2. Leverage Existing Frameworks - Do not Start from Scratch 
The DT has performed extensive industry outreach over the last several months and stakeholders 
have consistently underscored the importance of establishing clear implementation and 
expectations with purposeful wording used within the reliability requirements, applicability, 
severity levels, and compliance measures.  
 
Therefore, the DT pursued an approach to leverage existing Reliability Standard requirement 
language as a framework for computational load integration that relies on time-tested, compliance-
vetted, and industry -supported Reliability Standard requirement language . This  not only gives 
industry clearer understanding of expectations with the new Reliability Standard requirements but 
also helps ensure that DT’s incremental changes to existing standard language tie directly to the 
unique risks and reliability considerations associated with computational loads. Furthermore, given 
the new functional CLO and CLOP entities , the DT strategy  ensures terminology is used clearly  to 
both the new Functional Entities as well as existing entities.
----- PAGE 5 -----
FAQ for Project 2026-02 5 
3. Focus on Immediate Needs - Enable Industry Flexibility in an Evolving Time 
The DT recognizes that this is a rapidly evolving time in the industry for integrating computational 
loads, from computational load types, equipment and behavior; grid equipment, monitoring and 
capabilities; and unique interconnection, regional, and local considerations. Therefore, the industry 
needs ﬂexibility and agility now more than ever, balanced with the right Reliability Standard 
requirements to ensure that the aggregate risks to the BPS are mitigated. This strategy is tailored to 
address the immediate reliability needs before moving on to additional work already pending with 
stakeholders, such as those involved with the LLWG, to address longer-term needs.  
 
NERC anticipates initiating  Phase 2 of Reliability Standards development  subsequent to these 
Project 2026- 02 foundational standards . Therefore, NERC is not pursuing highly technical 
requirements that are still evolving or require additional technical work and industry alignment. In 
addition, the LLWG published a SAR Roadmap document on July 30, 2026 that proposes one or 
more other SARs ranging from high to low priority. The LLWG recommends various Reliability and 
Security Technical Committee (RSTC) subgroups to produce that technical work, including white 
papers, to support those proposed SARs. The SAR Roadmap will be subject to continued review as 
risks, needs, and priorities are further examined. 
 
What does it mean to develop “foundational” standards? 
Project 2026-02 focuses on the near-term, essential actions to integrate computational loads reliably onto 
the BPS. These essential actions address the core, building-block reliability needs for computational loads 
that can be readily layered into existing Reliability Standards and built upon in future reliability 
requirements.  
 
Project 2026-02 is creating, within the NERC body of Reliability Standards, a new family of standards called 
“Computational Load Ownership & Operations” (CLO) that focuses on the initial essential needs for moving 
the reliability needle quickly while anticipating additional longer-term work in 2027. The essential elements 
Project 2026-02 addresses include the following six attributes—identiﬁed within the SAR —under three 
draft foundational Reliability Standards: 
1. Data Sharing—Planning & Operational  
2. Interconnection Process & Requirements 
3. Interconnection Studies & Modeling 
4. Protection Coordination & High-Resolution Monitoring 
5. Commissioning 
6. Operations Communications & Response
----- PAGE 6 -----
FAQ for Project 2026-02 6 
Industry Engagement 
How is the Drafting Team engaging industry? 
The DT continues to pursue one of the most robust outreach strategies for any standard development 
project in order to raise awareness and obtain meaningful industry input early  in and throughout the 
process. This is consistent with NERC’s extensive outreach program under the Large Loads Action Plan. 
The DT has been frequently engaging stakeholders through bi-weekly public DT meetings, industry-wide 
forums, individual meetings with trade organizations, regionally -focused venues, direct stakeholder 
outreach, and Short -Term Advisory Group  input. Engagement has provided opportunities for early and 
recurring feedback, allowing the DT to consider the perspectives of industry well before initial balloting and 
formal commenting.  
 
What is the Short-Term Advisory Group? 
The Short-Term Advisory Group is a new concept leveraging opportunities identiﬁed from the 
Modernization of Standards Processes and Procedures (MSPP) initiative applied to Project 2026-02 to 
provide focused stakeholder input to the DT.  
 
The group is comprised of over 100 industry volunteers and subject matter experts that can help identify 
practical, technical, and implementation considerations early in the drafting process.  
 
The Short -Term Advisory Group supplements, not replace s, the formal NERC standards development 
process, including broader observer engagement, public comment, and ballot.  
 
New Functional Entities & Rules of Procedure Modifications 
Will Project 2026-02 work and ROP modiﬁcations apply to any new Functional Entities related to 
computational loads? 
Yes, the Project 2026-02 Reliability Standards work will include requirements applicable to new Functional 
Entities related to computational loads and their interconnecting Computational Load S ites (e.g., data  
centers). The latest ROP modiﬁcations will be posting for industry comment on August 19, 2026 and will 
include the addition of two new Functional Entities: Computational Load Owner and Computational Load 
Operator. 
 
Who determines the Registry Criteria for Computational Load Owners and Computational Load 
Operators? 
NERC Registration staﬀ are developing the draft registry criteria and associated revisions to the NERC ROP 
in accordance with the process laid out in the ROP . That process includes a stakeholder comment period, 
and the ﬁrst set of comments were submitted from April 2 -May 15, 2026. NERC has proposed registry 
criteria based on its analysis and  in coordination with the DT and other stakeholders that are material to 
BPS reliability. While highly coordinated, the registry criteria development is a separate process from the
----- PAGE 7 -----
FAQ for Project 2026-02 7 
Project 2026-02 standard development process. The latest ROP modiﬁcations will be posted for industry 
comment on August 19, 2026.  
 
Due to the criticality of ensuring Reliability Standards with the new and existing Functional Entities are fully 
aligned, the Project 2026-02 DT and NERC Registration staﬀ have engaged in frequent coordination. One of 
the primary objectives of Project 2026-02 has been to ensure that the NERC Glossary of Terms is updated 
to include deﬁned terms that fully align with the expected new Functional Entities and corresponding 
deﬁnitions to be reﬂected in the  NERC Glossary of Terms and deﬁnitions within the  modiﬁed ROP (e.g., 
Appendix 2A). 
 
What happens if the Rules of Procedure deﬁnitions are modiﬁed after Project 2026-02 balloting? 
Project 2026-02 is being balloted with proposed new deﬁnitions within the NERC Glossary of Terms  that 
are fully aligned with the proposed modiﬁcations to the ROP. This provides industry with full transparency 
in the stakeholder commenting and balloting process.  
 
However, if a material change occur s in the proposed ROP modiﬁcations aﬀecting Project 2026- 02, the 
change(s) would need to be reﬂected in the Project 2026-02 work; therefore, another ballot would be 
expected to be pursued. Out of an abundance of caution, the Project 2026- 02 schedule reﬂects this 
possibility. 
 
Rules of Procedure & Standard Applicability Considerations 
How was greater than or equal to 50 Megawatts (MW) selected for the Computational Load Owner and 
Operator criteria and applicability of the Project 2026-02 Standards? 
NERC Registration staﬀ selected a threshold criterion of greater than or equal to 50 MW based upon 
extensive technical review of existing and planned interconnection data across the BPS, as well as industry 
feedback.  
 
Project 2026-02 Reliability Standard applicability fully  aligns with the same 50 MW threshold criterion 
included in the registry criteria for CLOs and CLOPs. Project 2026-02 foundational Reliability Standards are 
focused on the essential actions  needed to support reliability of the BPS and therefore apply  to all 
Computational Load Sites and their CLOs and CLOPs that meet the NERC registry criteria. 
 
For purposes of the Computational Load Owner and Computational Load Operator criteria, is the 100 
kilo-Volts ( kV) threshold determined by the common point of connection or by the voltage of the 
equipment supplying the Computational Load Site? 
Both Project 2026- 02 and the proposed NERC registry criteria include the Computational Load Site 
deﬁnition reference to “supplied through electrical equipment connected at a voltage level greater than or 
equal to 100 kV.” The focus of the criterion is not on the common point of connection, as may be typically 
deﬁned in the interconnection Agreement, but rather the kV level to which the electrical equipment 
supplying the Computational Load Site is connected to the BPS. In other words, this would typically be the
----- PAGE 8 -----
FAQ for Project 2026-02 8 
high-side voltage level of the electrical equipment connected to the BPS that is supplying the 
Computational Load Site. 
 
Figures3 1 and 2  illustrate potential conﬁgurations where the Computational Load Sites have identical 
electrical interconnection conﬁgurations, but the point of common connection(s) may vary. In both Figures 
1 and 2, the Computational Load Site is supplied through electrical equipment that is connected to the BPS 
at a voltage level equal to or greater than 100 kV from one or more points of connection. Therefore, the 
CLOs and CLOPs of both Computational Load Sites would be subject to registration and be applicable to 
one or more NERC Reliability Standards being developed under Project 2026-02. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Common point of connection is the same as BPS connection. 
 
 
3 It is important to note that Figures included in this FAQ are not representative of the comprehensive set of electrical or ownership configuration 
possibilities of Computational Load Sites but are included to facilitate understanding of the applicability of the Registry and Standard Criteria. For 
example, there may be many other interconnection configurations or an intermediate entity such as the Distribution Provider (DP) or Transmission 
Owner (TO).
----- PAGE 9 -----
FAQ for Project 2026-02 9 
 
 
Figure 2: Common point of connection is diﬀerent than the BPS connection. 
 
Figure 3 illustrates a potential conﬁguration where the Computational Load Site is supplied through electrical 
equipment that is connected to the BPS at a voltage level less than 100 kV. Therefore, in this case, the owners 
and operators of the Computational Load Site would not be subject to registration nor be applicable to NERC 
Reliability Standards at this location. 
 
 
 
Figure 3: BPS connection is less than 100 kV.
----- PAGE 10 -----
FAQ for Project 2026-02 10 
What deﬁnes the boundary of a Computational Load S ite? Can you have multiple Computational Load 
Sites connected to the same source equipment  or a single Computational Load Site be supplied from 
diﬀerent source equipment? 
Computational Load Site is proposed to be deﬁned as part of the ROP modiﬁcations, as well as a new term 
in the NERC Glossary of Terms used in Reliability Standards. The new term proposes to include the phrase 
“one or more buildings, structures, or installations at a single location.” This accounts for the many diﬀerent 
conﬁgurations and constructs that may exist for Computational Load Sites. As part of the NERC registration 
process for CLOs and CLOPs, each Computational Load Site will be reviewed based on its speciﬁc factors to 
determine applicability. The registration process may consider many factors  pertaining to the buildings, 
structures, or installations; including, but not limited to ownership, shared or common infrastructure (e.g., 
auxiliary or cooling load), or coordinated use across the information technology infrastructure to perform 
its computational activities. 
 
Therefore, it is possible to have two or more  Computational Load Sites connected to the same source 
equipment because they represent distinct sets of buildings, structures, or installations at a single location. 
Figure 4 illustrates this potential conﬁguration, and both owners and operators of Computational Load Sites 
A and B would be subject to registration and be applicable to one or more NERC Reliability Standards. 
 
Conversely, it is possible to have a single Computational Load Site supplied from diﬀerent source equipment 
or buses. This is consistent with the CLO and CLOP registry criteria that speciﬁes that the connection to the 
BPS may be “from one or more points of connection.” Figure 5 illustrates a single set of buildings, structures, 
or installations at a single location that is served from two diﬀerent stations or buses, and the owner and 
operator of the Computational Load Site would be subject to registration and be applicable to one or more 
NERC Reliability Standards being developed under Project 2026-02.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Two Computational Load Sites served from the same supply equipment.
----- PAGE 11 -----
FAQ for Project 2026-02 11 
 
 
 
Figure 5: A single Computational Load Site served from separate stations or buses. 
 
Can there be more than one  Computational Load Owner and Computational Load Operator of a single 
Computational Load Site? 
Yes, it is possible for there to be more than one  CLO and CLOP of a single Computational Load Site based 
on the ownership and operational responsibility of the equipment at the site. Each qualifying CLO and CLOP 
would be reviewed as part of the registration process. 
 
At a Computational Load Site with many equipment operators or tenants, can a centralized or shared 
operating function serve as a single, accountable point of contact for such a site? 
 
Yes, at a site with multiple tenants, it would be acceptable for a centralized or shared operating function to 
serve as a single, accountable Computational Load Operator responsible for the CLO -002-1 reliability 
requirements for the Computational Load Site. 
 
Does the inclusion of a Computational Load Site that meets the Registry Criteria of a Computational Load 
Owner and Computational Load Operator bring equipment into the Bulk Electric System or Facility 
deﬁnitions? 
No, the Bulk Electric System (BES) and Facility deﬁnitions are not being modiﬁed by the Project 2026 -02 
Reliability Standards or the proposed ROP modiﬁcations. The deﬁnition of Computational Load Sites and 
corresponding registry criteria for CLO and CLOP are intentionally distinct from the BES and Facility 
deﬁnitions. Therefore, any BPS or Computational Load Site equipment that does not explicitly meet the 
existing BES or Facility deﬁnitions would not be subject to NERC Reliability Standard requirements that 
refer to the BES or Facility deﬁned terms.
4 
 
 
4 Please note that it is possible that a Computational Load Site might have assets which fall within the definition of BES or B PS. Nothing in the 
proposals would alter that.
----- PAGE 12 -----
FAQ for Project 2026-02 12 
CLOs and CLOPs that own or operate large amounts of power electronic -based equipment such as those 
found in Computational Load Sites have been found to reduce reliability  of the BPS and will be required, 
based upon draft registry criteria and Reliability Standards, to have facilities and control systems necessary 
for connecting to and operating reliably and securely while interconnected with the BPS . Project 2026-02 
work is developing continent-wide Reliability Standards that apply speciﬁcally to these Computational Load 
Sites, CLOs, and CLOPs.  
 
Will a Computational Load Site that interconnects to an entity that is not currently registered as a 
Distribution Provider automatically require that entity to become registered as a Distribution Provider? 
No. Neither the ROP modiﬁcations nor the new NERC Reliability Standards being developed under Project 
2026-02 are modifying the registry criteria that exists for registering Distribution Providers (DPs). Therefore, 
the interconnection to an entity not registered as a DP does not inherently require that entity to become 
registered as a DP on the basis that a CLO and CLOP are required to register with NERC. Potential registration 
of an entity as a DP will continue to be assessed against existing, established NERC registry criteria. Any 
future changes to the criteria, if needed, would be subject to a separate ROP modiﬁcations eﬀort and would 
not be included in the proposed ROP modiﬁcation and NERC Reliability Standards being developed under 
Project 2026-02 development initiatives. 
  
Will a Computational Load Site that has onsite generation or inverter -based equipment like Battery 
Energy Storage Systems ( BESS) automatically require Generator Owner & Generator Operator 
registrations? 
Not necessarily. There are many potential conﬁgurations and operation scenarios for Computational Load 
Sites that have on-site generation or other inverter-based equipment like BESS. For example, in some cases, 
the onsite generation can operate in parallel with the BPS, while in others this parallel operation is designed 
not to occur. Additionally, there may be situations where the inverter-based equipment, like BESS, operates 
solely to support interconnection requirements and load smoothing and does not export Real Power to the 
BPS, while in others it can. It is important to note that neither the ROP modiﬁcations nor the new NERC 
Reliability Standards being developed under Project 2026-02 are modifying the registry criteria that exists 
for Generator Owners (GOs) or Generator Operators (GOPs). Potential registration of an entity as a GO or 
GOP will continue to be assessed against this existing, established NERC registry criteria.  
 
Furthermore, it is recognized that there may need to be additional NERC reliability standard development 
regarding co-located generation with Computational Load Sites after Project 2026- 02. For example, the 
Large Load Working Group’s SAR Priority Roadmap recommended a potential SAR in 2027 pertaining to co-
located Computational Load Sites and generation. 
 
Why are Distribution Providers applicable to the NERC Reliability Standards being developed under 
Project 2026-02? 
By deﬁnition, a “Distribution Provider” means the entity that provides and operates the “wires” between 
the transmission system and the end-use customer. For those end-use customers (e.g., CLO/CLOP) who are 
served at transmission voltages, the Transmission Owner (TO) also serves as the Distribution Provider. Thus,
----- PAGE 13 -----
FAQ for Project 2026-02 13 
the DP is not deﬁned by a speciﬁc voltage, but rather as performing the distribution function at any voltage. 
Therefore, it is important when a Computational Load Site is connected to the D P, that the DP fulﬁlls the 
requirements being established in the new NERC Reliability Standards (CLO-001-1 and CLO -003-1) being 
developed under Project 2026 -02. For example, requirements for establishing interconnection 
requirements in coordination with other reliability Functional Entities, supporting any studies required by 
the Transmission Planner (TP) or Planning Coordinator  (PC), and ensuring appropriate disturbance 
monitoring equipment in interconnection conﬁgurations where the DP may own the equipment applicable 
to the NERC Reliability Standards being developed under Project 2026-02 (e.g., main power transformers).  
 
Figures 6 and 7 illustrate potential conﬁgurations where a Computational Load Site satisﬁes the equal to or 
greater than 100 kV connection criterion and is interconnecting to a DP. In Figure 6 , the Computational 
Load Site is through a DP’s electrical equipment to the BPS at a high- side voltage above 100 kV owned by 
the TO. In Figure 7, in contrast, the Computational Load Site is interconnected through a DP’s electrical 
equipment to the BPS at a high-side voltage above 100 kV. The owners and operators of the Computational 
Load Sites shown in Figure 6 and Figure 7 would be subject to registration and be applicable to the NERC 
Reliability Standards being developed under Project 2026-02. 
 
 
 
Figure 6: DP interconnecting a Computational Load Site served from TO facilities.
----- PAGE 14 -----
FAQ for Project 2026-02 14 
 
 
Figure 7: DP interconnecting a Computational Load Site in the absence of a TO 
 
Why are Generator Owners applicable to some of the requirements in the proposed NERC Reliability 
Standards being developed under Project 2026-02? 
While Computational Load Sites may typically interconnect to TOs  and DPs, there is the potential for a 
Computational Load Site to interconnect to facilities owned by a GO. Therefore, it is important in these 
situations for the GO to establish interconnection requirements that are coordinated with its TO, and for 
the GO to support any studies required by the TP or PC. This concept is similar to existing requirements in 
Reliability Standard FAC-001 for GOs with other types of interconnections to their facilities. 
 
Are all Transmission Owners, Distribution Providers, and Generator Owners required to have 
interconnection requirements for Computational Load Sites, even if no Computational Load Sites are 
expected to interconnect to their facilities? 
Feedback suggests that there are many DPs, GOs, and some TOs that do not have Computational Load Sites 
interconnecting to their facilities , nor do they have any expected in the foreseeable future. There was 
concern about creating compliance obligations associated with the establishment of interconnection 
requirements for Computational Load Sites that were not needed or applicable. 
 
Therefore, the DT developed a structure that only applies requirements on  a TO, DP, and GO that “has a 
Computational Load Site interconnection or has a fully executed Agreement to conduct a study on the 
reliability impact of interconnecting a Computational Load Site.”  
 
This approach avoids applying new obligations to every TO, GO,  or DP regardless of whether it has 
computational load interconnection activity. Similar, NERC applicability structures have been used across
----- PAGE 15 -----
FAQ for Project 2026-02 15 
other Reliability Standards (e.g., FAC-001, PRC-019) that limit applicable Functional Entities to a subset  
depending on whether an entity owns, operates, interconnects, studies, or otherwise has responsibility for 
relevant facilities or activities contained within a standard. 
 
Will Project 2026-02 apply to existing Functional Entities as well? 
Yes. The proposed Reliability Standards developed for Project 2026-02 apply to new Functional Entities – 
CLOs and CLOPs – in addition to the listed applicable Functional Entities.  
 
These existing Functional Entities that are applicable include the TO, DP, GO, TP, PC, Transmission Operator 
(TOP), Balancing Authority (BA), and Reliability Coordinator (RC) functions. This is consistent with the NERC 
Level 3 Computational Load Alert (as discussed in the next question).  
 
This is because CLOs and CLOPs alone cannot mitigate the potential risk to the BPS. The essential actions 
being included in the Project 2026-02 foundational Reliability Standards also require actions from existing 
Functional Entities for the reliable integration of computational loads. For example, for a Computational 
Load Owner to provide the appropriate modeling or operational data. Likewise, entities like the TP , PC, BA, 
RC, and TOP must provide the necessary data speciﬁcations to CLOs and CLOPs . Similarly, for CLOs to 
properly coordinate and collaborate to support interconnection requirements, study processes, and 
commissioning. Interconnecting entities like TOs and some DPs and GO s must provide CLOs with those 
requirements. 
 
How do the proposed Reliability Standards under development through Project 2026-02 relate to the 
May 2026 NERC Level 3 Alert? 
The May 2026 NERC Level 3 Alert  is an important and timely step  toward improving reliability because it 
appropriately provides near-term essential actions entities should take to mitigate risks associated with 
integration of computational loads and reinforces the need for immediate industry attention. The alert 
helps identify practical actions that existing registered entities can take now to mitigate these risks while 
Reliability Standards are being developed. 
 
However, the alert should be understood as a bridge to Reliability Standards, not a replacement for them. 
While the Level 3 Alert is limited to, and applicable to, existing registered entities, the work under Project 
2026-02 regarding the new CLO and CLOP Functional Entities may alter recent near-term essential actions 
and change who is responsible for speciﬁc actions. As a result, the particular assignment of responsibilities 
in what will be the ﬁnal approved NERC Reliability Standards may diﬀer from the practical actions identiﬁed 
in the NERC alert, particularly where a responsibility is more appropriately placed on, coordinated with, or 
shared with the anticipated registration of the CLO and CLOP entities. 
 
Further, the ﬁnal Reliability Standards may not address every aspect of the NERC alert in the same way or 
at the same level of speciﬁcity. Some alert concepts may be incorporated directly, some may be modiﬁed 
to ﬁt a more appropriate framework, and others may be deferred or addressed through a future standard 
development eﬀort if additional technical work, industry alignment, or a diﬀerent standards structure is 
needed.
----- PAGE 16 -----
FAQ for Project 2026-02 16 
 
New Standards Versus Existing Standards 
What are the proposed new Reliability Standards (CLO-001-1, CLO-002-1, and CLO-003-1) being 
developed? 
The DT has developed three new Reliability Standards to be part of a new NERC Reliability Standard family 
(CLO). The three foundational Reliability Standards collectively represent the  high-priority and essential 
actions needed to reliably integrate computational loads onto the BPS. These actions are grouped into 
separate standards that center around the major phases of computational load integration.  
• CLO-001-1 addresses the planning-facing integration work: interconnection requirements, studies, 
commissioning, qualiﬁed changes, and modeling data.  
• CLO-002-1 addresses the operating -facing integration work: operational data, interpersonal 
communications, Operating Instructions, and response to Operating Instructions.  
• CLO-003-1 addresses protection  and monitoring equipment integration work:  protection 
coordination and disturbance monitoring data needed for event analysis. 
 
Why not simply modify Reliability Standards such as IRO, TOP , FAC, COM, MOD, or PRC? 
The development of new Reliability Standards provides several distinct advantages related to the 
uniqueness of computational loads.  
• First, the creation of new Reliability Standards facilitates the expedited schedule  to meet FERC’s 
December 31, 2026 deadline by reducing the complexity of on-going interactions with other NERC 
Reliability Standards development  projects. Many of the existing Reliability Standards that have 
comparable actions (e.g., MOD -032, TOP-003, IRO- 010) to those requirements being developed 
have active projects that would signiﬁcantly compound complexity and risk confusion in delivering 
the key objectives of Project 2026-02 in a timely manner. 
• Second, centralizing many of the essential actions in a new Reliability Standard family (i.e., CLO) 
provides a focused and centralized grouping for computational load reliability obligations. This can 
be especially important for clarity as new Functional Entities (e.g., CLOs and CLOPs) enter the NERC 
regulatory space. 
 
At the same time, for clarity, the proposal includes a narrow update to the applicability section of FAC-001 
and FAC-002 that the requirements in those Standards are not intended to apply to end user Facilities 
subject to proposed CLO -001 and CLO-002.5 The DT received feedback that it should avoid inadvertently 
creating duplicative compliance obligations in FAC -001 and FAC -002. This should help support 
implementation and clear understanding of compliance obligations. Please note that there is no ongoing 
project to modify Reliability Standards FAC-001 and FAC-002. 
 
 
5 End user and third-party Facilities outside the scope of CLO-001 and CLO-002 would still fall within the scope of FAC-001 and FAC-002.
----- PAGE 17 -----
FAQ for Project 2026-02 17 
Will Reliability Standards CLO-001-1, CLO-002-1, and CLO-003-1 requirements eventually be moved to 
existing standards? 
Project 2026-02 foundational Reliability Standards are being developed as building blocks that can remain 
self-contained Reliability Standards with their own applicability, requirements, measures, evidence 
retention needs, and implementation structure. This design supports longevity and allows the standards to 
operate without depending on later integration into other existing standards. At the same time, the CLO 
and CLOP requirements are being developed to align with comparable requirements and measures used 
for other types of BPS facilities and entities. That alignment could support future integration, conforming 
revisions, or targeted modiﬁcations if it is  later determine d that such changes would improve clarity, 
eﬃciency, or long-term organization goals of the body of Reliability Standards. 
 
Implementation Plan Development 
Will the Project 2026-02 foundational Reliability Standards be implemented for existing and future 
owners and operators of Computational Load Sites? 
Yes, the Project 2026-02 foundational Reliability Standards include the essential actions needed to support 
reliability of the BPS and apply to existing and future CLO and CLOP entities of Computational Load Sites. 
The speciﬁc timing and applicability of these proposed Reliability Standards is included in the corresponding 
implementation plans, which were developed with extensive industry input. 
 
Will implementation be phased in and what is the expected timing? 
The implementation plan s are an incredibly important part of Project 2026- 02. They address Reliability 
Standard eﬀective dates, applicability transitions, deﬁnition(s), and compliance expectations during the 
initial implementation period. Each implementation plan for proposed Reliability Standards CLO-001-1, 
CLO-002-1, and CLO -003-1 also distinguish es implementation timing on a requirement -by-requirement 
basis, as determined by the DT and stakeholder input. 
 
The near-term essential actions included in these high-priority foundational Reliability Standards are to be 
implemented as soon as practical (in advance of any applicable eﬀective dates) to mitigate risk to the BPS. 
Many of these requirements are process-related and, therefore, may have a shorter implementation period 
than those requirements that require equipment procurement and installation, such as disturbance 
monitoring equipment. The implementation plans have been developed with industry feedback, including 
input from the Short-Term Advisory Group. 
 
How will implementation be coordinated with the registration of Computational Load Owners and 
Computational Load Operators? 
The Project 2026-02 DT is closely coordinating with NERC Registration staﬀ to ensure implementation of 
the new Reliability Standards will align with the registration of the CLO and CLOP Functional Entity 
candidates.
----- PAGE 18 -----
FAQ for Project 2026-02 18 
Technical Topics 
Why are interconnection requirements included in the foundational standards? 
Project 2026-02 plans to provide the foundational performance expectation that spans the connection 
between the BPS and the Computational Load Sites, meaning that interconnection requirements between 
these two electrical facilities are the foundation. Establishing interconnection requirements that consider 
the needs of grid planners and operators  is foundational to this relationship. This includes  ensuring the 
necessary interconnection studies are performed using accurate modeling data, ensuring operational 
readiness when onboarding facilities onto the grid, and supporting on-going operational stewardship with 
proper communication protocols.  
 
Additionally, establishing interconnection requirements is consistent with the NERC Level 3 Computational 
Load Alert  and was identiﬁed in in LLWG “Assessment of Gaps in Existing Practices, Requirements, and 
Reliability Standards for Emerging Large Loads” white paper.  
 
Why isn’t Qualiﬁed Change explicitly deﬁned as a common continent-wide basis? 
The Project 2026- 02 standards require Planning Coordinator (PC) to determine, and publicly post, the 
deﬁnition of Qualiﬁed Change for the purposes of interconnection of Computational Load Sites. PCs are the 
Functional Entities that have the compliance obligation and technical responsibility to reliably plan the 
transmission system. A common single continent-wide deﬁnition is not practical because planning systems, 
interconnection processes, technologies, and markets diﬀer. Since the reliability impact to the BPS may vary 
by system, the PC is the entity best suited to determine what represents a Qualiﬁed Change for their system. 
This is an identical approach already used for generation, transmission, and other end -user 
interconnections in NERC reliability standards. However, the Qualiﬁed Change deﬁnitions should consider 
changes that materially impact the expected behavior of the Computational Load Site that can pose 
potential risk to the BPS. Therefore, the Technical Rationale for the CLO-001-1 reliability standard includes 
examples of qualiﬁed changes for Computational Load Sites that PCs should consider. 
 
How does Project 2026-02 address voltage and frequency ride-through? 
Project 2026- 02 proposed foundational Reliability Standards  address the  essential actions needed to 
mitigate the risk to the BPS related to disturbance behavior of computational loads (e.g., voltage and 
frequency ride-through). Speciﬁcally, the Reliability Standards ensure the provision of accurate dynamic 
modeling data that enable TPs or PCs to do the necessary planning studies to ensure the BPS is expected 
to operate within acceptable performance criteria. Additionally, it requires the establishment of 
interconnection requirements that consider any unique needs of TPs and PCs, which can include ride -
through criteria based on an assessment of needed grid performance. 
 
While Project 2026-02 is not addressing any industry-wide, minimum voltage and frequency ride-through 
performance requirements, work is actively progressing in the LLWG to further the technical work and 
industry alignment needed to begin developing requirements . In the SAR Priority Roadmap document,
----- PAGE 19 -----
FAQ for Project 2026-02 19 
voltage and frequency ride -through is recognized as a high priority for the development of an additional 
SAR to be submitted in 2026. 
 
Why are Sequence of Events Recording, Fault Recording, and Dynamic Disturbance Recording required 
for computational loads? 
High-resolution monitoring equipment such as Sequence of Events Recording (SER), Fault Recording (FR), 
and Dynamic Disturbance Recording ( DDR) equipment are essential to support activities such as event 
analysis, model validation, and understanding of computational load response during BPS disturbances. 
Computational loads often include fast load behaviors and protection and control interactions that are not 
fully captured through ordinary telemetry. Similar to NERC Reliability Standard PRC-028-1 for Inverter--
Based Resources (IBRs), it is critical to have all three types of capability not only on the grid, but also at and 
within Computational Load Sites . The Technical Rationale for Reliability Standard CLO-003-1 provides 
additional information on the background, reasoning, and applicability of SER, FR, and DDR data.  
 
Who is responsible for disturbance monitoring equipment like Sequence of Event Recording (SER), Fault 
Recording (FR), and Dynamic Disturbance Recording (DDR)? 
The CLO-003-1 standard, and its Technical Rationale, provides additional detail on the entity responsible 
for the required monitoring data. For FR and DDR data, it helps engineers understand the Computational 
Load Site’s contribution to system events on the BPS, the data measurement is required at the high-side of 
the main power transformer(s) or common point of connection(s). The entity who owns the main power 
transformer(s) is the one responsible for obtaining and providing the data as they are typically best suited 
to install any disturbance monitoring equipment based on this ownership. However, the CLO -003-1 
standard does not preclude separate agreements for other entities to install and maintain the equipment. 
For SER data, which is required for Computational Load Site circuit breakers , helps engineers understand 
Computational Load Site breaker order of operation during events to support event analysis. This approach 
is comparable to requirements for Inverter-Based Resources in PRC-029.  
 
By requiring Computational Load Operators to respond to Operating Instructions, could this eﬀectively 
change a Computational Load Site to interruptible, ﬂexible, or non-ﬁrm service? What if a Computational 
Load is unable to implement an Operating Instruction? 
The foundational CLO-002-1 standard establishes essential interpersonal communications and operational 
response processes for Computational Load Sites. These interpersonal communication requirements are 
comparable to (and follow the same NERC requirement framework for) all other operators of equipment 
that can me aningfully impact BPS reliability. The requirements explicitly denote that responding to 
Operating Instructions is not required when such action cannot be physically implemented or it would 
violate safety, equipment, regulatory, or statutory requirements. Furthermore, nothing in the Project 2026-
02 standards changes the service priority agreed upon for Computational Load Sites. Generator Operators 
and Transmission Operators today may similarly operate a variety of facilities, some with “ﬁrm” 
transmission service, and others with lower priority service. RCs, BAs, and TOPs issue Operating Instructions 
consistent with their Operating Processes and market and regulatory requirements to reliably manage the 
system in normal and emergency conditions.
----- PAGE 20 -----
FAQ for Project 2026-02 20 
 
Why include modeling and model veriﬁcation, but not model validation? 
Reliable integration of computational loads depends on TPs and PC s having information that reasonably 
represents how the load is expected to behave under normal and disturbance conditions. It is critical that 
the data provided be veriﬁed as representative of the actual equipment installation and conﬁguration  
(model veriﬁcation). 
 
Model validation ( comparing simulation results with measurements to assess how closely a model’s 
behavior matches the measured behavior) is much more complex. Furthermore, methods, capabilities, and 
best practices are still evolving for model validation for computational loads. The Load Modeling Working 
Group is currently developing a white paper, targeting completion in 2027, that will provide better insight 
into model validation approaches.
