----- PAGE 1 -----
RELIABILITY | RESILIENCE | SECURITY  
POWERING TODAY.  PROTECTING TOMORROW.  
Technical Reasoning Update 
Proposed Computational Load Owner and Computational Load Operator  
August 19, 2026                    
 
 
Background 
NERC has been actively assessing the impact of large loads on the reliability of the Bulk Power System (BPS) since March 
of 2024 by engaging relevant stakeholders to understand risks and appropriate mitigations. In March 2024, the Reliability 
and Security Technical Committee (RSTC) hosted a panel to discuss the impact of large loads originating from data centers 
and cryptocurrency mining centers.  By Summer of 2024, the RSTC had launched what is today the Large Load Working 
Group (LLWG).  The LLWG has been instrumental in helping to gauge the scope of risk, gaps, and next steps in NERC ’s 
response. Additional work by NERC and the Regional Entities, including, the January 2025 incident review on a large load 
loss event in the Eastern Interconnection,  and the January 2026 incident review of voltag e-sensitive crypto load 
reductions in Texas Interconnection, also continues.   
 
Through these events, NERC identiﬁed the unique electrical behaviors, composition, and aggregate impacts that increase 
risk when large amounts of computational load are connected to the BPS. To ensure these loads that pose an increased 
risk when connected to the BPS have speciﬁc requirements, NERC determined it should modify its Registry Criteria to 
require computational loads (i.e., “users”) to register with NERC . The NERC Registry Criteria prescribe the threshold(s) 
for which users, owners, and operators of the BPS must register with NERC. At a minimum, an entity registered by NERC 
will be subject to at least one NERC Reliability Standard requirement (to be determined through the NERC Standards 
development process). For a thorough technical discussion of the impacts and risks of large loads, please refer to the 
source material provided on the Large Loads Action Plan web page. 
 
On April 1, 2026, NERC proposed revisions to its Rules of Procedure (ROP) to require registration of Computational Load 
Entities that contribute to an aggregate capability of 20 megawatt (MW) connected at a BPS voltage greater than or equal 
to 60 kilovolts (kV), with 1 MW or greater of Computational Load. NERC posted these proposed ROP revisions for a public 
comment period that ended on May 15, 2026. Based on the comments received, NERC has revised its proposed ROP 
revisions, as described in the next section.  
 
In addition, on July 16, 2026, FERC issued an Order directing NERC to ﬁle Reliability Standards pertaining to computational 
load integration. The Order also directed NERC to develop revisions to its ROP necessary for the registration of 
computational load entities and to submit the proposed revisions by December 31, 2026.    
 
Changes to ROP Revisions 
NERC received 32 sets of comments from 44 commenters regarding the April 1 posting of proposed ROP revisions. The 
major themes of stakeholder comments include: 
 
• General support in addressing the risk while more explicit justiﬁcation is needed 
• Change Computational Load Entity to Computational Load Owner and Computational Load Operator functions 
• Proposed 20 MW and/or 60 kV is too low or includes unintended entities 
• Remove 1 MW “de minimis” criteria 
• Suggested deﬁnition of “Computational Load Facility” for greater clarity 
• Need clariﬁcation on the point of interconnection
----- PAGE 2 -----
Technical Reasoning – Proposed Computational Load Owner and Computational Load Operator 2 
During and following the April 1 ROP posting, NERC registration staﬀ have been collaborating with the Project 2026 -02 
Standard Drafting Team (SDT) to ensure alignment with common terms and deﬁnitions, as well as understanding of 
proposed ROP Registry Criteria revisions. Based on the stakeholder comments and coordination with the SDT , as well as 
addition analysis performed by NERC registration, the proposed ROP revisions have been changed as follows:  
 
• Replace the single Computational Load Entity function with two functions, Computational Load Owner (CLO) and 
Computational Load Operator (CLOP), to better represent the structure of the industry:1 
 
Computational Load Owner means the entity that owns and maintains a Computational Load Site. 
 
Computational Load Operator means the entity that operates a Computational Load Site. 
 
• Increase the registry criteria threshold to 50 MW and 100 kV and update the point of interconnection language 
to better align with BPS reliability risk:  
 
Computational Load Owner of a Computational Load Site with a total connected Load greater than or equal 
to 50 MW that is supplied through electrical equipment  connected at a voltage level greater than or equal 
to 100 kV from one or more points of connection.  
 
Computational Load  Operator of  a Computational Load  Site with a total connected Load greater than or 
equal to 50 MW that is supplied through electrical equipment  connected at a voltage level greater than or 
equal to 100 kV from one or more points of connection.  
 
• Remove the 1 MW “de minimis” Computational Load criteria, and  
• Replace the Computational Load deﬁnition with a Computations Load Site deﬁnition to clarify what loads are 
subject to the proposed criteria: 
 
Computational Load Site means one or more buildings, structures, or installations at a single location that  
1. Primarily contains information technology infrastructure used for:  
• creating, executing, and delivering software applications and services;   
• artiﬁcial intelligence training, deployment, and delivery;   
• cryptocurrency mining; or   
• other computational activities at a data center; and  
2. Is supplied through electrical equipment that is connected to the BPS.  
       
NERC registration staﬀ in collaboration with the SDT developed a Frequently Asked Questions  (FAQ) document that 
addresses certain questions related to the application of this proposed registry criteria. For example, the FAQ includes 
Computational Load Site conﬁguration scenarios that are evaluated against the proposed criteria, provides guidance to 
identify the connection point(s) to the BPS, and contains factors that deﬁne a Computational Load Site boundary, as well 
as several other issues.   
 
 
 
1 This framework is also consistent with other existing NERC Registry functions, such as Generator Owners and Operators and Transmission Owners 
and Operators.
----- PAGE 3 -----
Technical Reasoning – Proposed Computational Load Owner and Computational Load Operator 3 
Thresholds 
NERC’s proposed criteria for CLO and CLOP are based on their aggregate impact to the BPS.2 It is important to note that 
aggregate impact, in this case, is a diﬀerent arrangement than the aggregate Computational Load Site capability of an 
individual registration candidate as outlined in the proposed ROP Registry Criteria. Speciﬁcally, aggregate impact refers 
to the impact of several Computational Load Sites connecting to the BPS in a similar manner where their aggregate 
characteristics impact BPS reliability collectively.  
 
NERC’s initial analysis and threshold recommendation of 20 MW and 60 kV was based on data provided from responses 
to the Level 2 Alert. Data NERC received regarding the interconnection of large loads and other eﬀorts of the NERC LLWG 
are summarized in the public Level 2 Alert report posted on March 17, 2026.3 Existing registered functional entities (e.g., 
Transmission Owners, Distribution Providers, etc.) were requested to provide the total capacity of large loads on their 
system that are currently operational and expected to be in-service by the end of 2027, including the voltage level at the 
interconnecting point. The report concluded that large load is expected to change its composition dramatically, moving 
from a split between industrial and computational load to almost entirely computational. The Alert worksheet 
information further indicated that load may increase by 300 GW between 2028 and 2030, with the bulk of this increase 
represented by data centers. A large share of the expected load growth will come from the “Traditional Data Center,” “AI 
Data Center,” and “Cryptocurrency Mining” categories (or a combination of the three). In general, the Alert data provided 
valuable insight into BPS-connected large load risks; however, NERC was concerned that further analysis was warranted 
given the large share of this expected load growth. 
 
As a result, NERC has performed additional research  on Computational Load Site development which has resulted in 
updating the proposed NERC Registry  Criteria threshold to 50 MW and 100 kV. The analysis  was conducted u sing 
comprehensive data collected by a third-party who tracks existing and future data center activity.4 The data is consistently 
updated with NERC’s additional analysis based on June 2026  data. Data includes individual building , campus, their 
locations, electric utility information, and load estimates. NERC used its internal analysis tools to complement the Alert 
worksheet data voltage and interconnection information that was used to propose the initial NERC Registry Criteria 
threshold. The additional analysis led to a more reﬁned understanding of the aggregate risks associated with data center 
clusters connected throughout the BPS. 
 
NERC ’s additional analysis revealed there is 41,827 MW of active data center load (at all voltages) as of June 2026 and 
an additional 37,675 MW under construction and expected to be in -service by the end of 2027, for an overall total of 
approximately 79,502 MW by year end 2027. NERC estimates that the proposed 50 MW and 100 kV threshold should 
lead to the registration of approximately 68,288 MW of Computational Load Site owners and operators . This amount 
equals approximately 86% of the overall total (all sizes and voltages) and captures the vast majority of computational 
load entities that pose aggregate risks to the BPS. The threshold encompasses those Computational Load Sites that are 
of the size and connected voltage that can create unforeseen and diﬃcult-to-explain dynamic behaviors when connected 
to the BPS. NERC determined the 100 kV voltage criteria is an appropriate threshold based on its interconnection voltage 
analysis. At the 50 MW threshold, there was a small diﬀerence of only 2% of the overall total load comparing 100 kV to 
the previously proposed 60 kV threshold. The 2% of load represents those Computational Load Sites which are generally 
smaller than 50 MW,  dispersed across the BPS , and represent a smaller fraction of the collective load where they are 
 
2  North American Electric Reliability Corporation, 150 FERC ¶ 61,213 at P 58 (2015) (stating, “Registry Criteria provide that a class of entities, 
each of which would be individually excluded, may nevertheless be registered based on their aggregate impact on Bulk-Power System reliability.”) 
3  See NERC Aggregated Report on NERC Level 2 Industry Recommendation: Large Load Interconnection, Study, Commissioning, and 
Operations, at https://www.nerc.com/globalassets/programs/bpsa/alerts/2025/aggregated-report-level-2-large-load-interconnection-study-
commissioning-and-operations.pdf. For additional information, please see the NERC Large Loads Action Plan web page at 
https://www.nerc.com/initiatives/large-loads-action-plan. 
4 NERC has a license with Aterio to access its “US Data Center Locations and Power Demand” data set which “provides a comprehensive inventory 
of data centers across the United States, including those currently operational, under development, and planned for future construction.”
----- PAGE 4 -----
Technical Reasoning – Proposed Computational Load Owner and Computational Load Operator 4 
located, thus representing less aggregate risk . In addition, the proposed 50 MW and 100 kV threshold ensures BPS-
connected entities are subject to registration while excluding entities that  have not been seen to negatively impact BPS 
reliability and  removes confusion about whether a Computational Load Site is served by what may be considered local 
distribution. Further, NERC estimated that increasing the threshold to 75 MW would lower the amount of Computational 
Load Site owners and operators  subject to registration to approximately 63,960 MW, or 80% of the total, which NERC 
asserts would not be suﬃcient to address the aggregate risk to the BPS. NERC will continue to monitor computational 
total connected Load and connection voltage with respect to the aggregate risks  and reserves the right to propose 
additional ROP Registry Criteria changes in the future to address any risks to the BPS.
