--- PAGE 1 ---
Large Loads Action Plan Q2 2026 Update 
Past, Current, and Future Actions to Address an Emerging Risk 
July 2026 
LLAP
Second Quarter Actions
Level 3 Essential Action Alert Issued 
On May 4, NERC released a Level 3 Essential Action Alert, Computational Load Modeling, Studies, Instrumentation, 
Commissioning, Operations, Protection, and Control, which outlined seven  actions registered  entities  must 
implement to address immediate risks posed by computational loads interfacing with the BPS. The Level 3 alert was 
issued as NERC observed customer-initiated large load reductions and signiﬁcant oscillations that occur in seconds, 
leaving little or no room for real-time responses and posing a threat to BPS reliabilit y. The deadline for registered 
entities to submit their responses is August 3, 2026.   
An informational webinar is scheduled on July 8 to share frequently asked questions and answer inquiries. 
Reliability Guideline Published 
On May 1, NERC published a Reliability Guideline: Risk Mitigation for Emerging Large Loads , recommend ing 
actions for traditional utilities and grid operators, and the companies behind these emerging large loads 
including equipment manufacturers. The goal is to ensure that as more industrial-scale consumers connect to the 
grid, they actively participate in practices that protect grid stability. These steps highlight that proactive 
planning and participation can enable even more of these facilities to come online reliably and quickly. Although 
non-binding, NERC strongly urges all relevant entities to adopt the recommended risk mitigation strategies 
outlined in the Reliability Guideline.   
Watch the Video on 
NERC's Large Loads Action Plan
--- PAGE 2 ---
Registration Criteria for Computational Loads  
NERC will deﬁne which entities, based on speciﬁc physical and electrical criteria, would be required to register with 
NERC and comply with its Reliability Standards to address risks associated with large computational loads. To 
achieve this, NERC is revising its Rules of Procedure, Appendix 5B Statement of Compliance Registry Criteria, to 
account for Computational Load Entities. An initial draft was posted for a stakeholder 45-day comment period on 
April 1, 2026, on the Proposed Changes to Rules of Procedure  web page. The initial comments on the proposed 
revisions included meaningful insights that NERC will review and incorporate into the next comment period, 
anticipated in August 2026.  
An informational webinar is scheduled on July 13 to provide updates on the progress of this development eﬀort 
and share information about the registration process for entities that may fall under these new criteria.   
Reliability Standards 
NERC will revise and adopt new Reliability Standards to deﬁne computational loads and establish measurable 
requirements for newly registered entities. NERC posted a Standard Authorization Request (SAR) for comment in 
April that included new deﬁnitions for use in standards for computational loads and a foundational standard. Initial 
comments were reviewed, and the Standards Committee approved a ﬁnal SAR and authorized the drafting of a 
Reliability Standard in May. The proposed Reliability Standards will be issued in August for a 45-day comment 
period, with an additional comment period to follow in the fourth quarter. The Reliability Standard is targeted for 
ﬁnal Board approval and adoption in December.  
Actions Taken by NERC to Address Large Loads on the Grid 
Q2 2026
Q1 2026
• Posted a draft registry criteria for comments (April)  
• Posted a Standards Authorization Request for comments (April) 
• Published a Reliability Guideline: Risk Mitigation for Large Loads (May) 
• Issued a Level 3 Alert for Essential Actions (May) 
• Initiated a standards drafting (May) 
• Published Incident Review: Voltage-Sensitive Crypto Load Reductions (January) 
• Hosted Emerging Large Loads Technical Conference (February) 
• Published Assessment of Gaps in Existing Practices, Requirements, and Reliability 
Standards for Emerging Large Loads (March) 
• Published Aggregated Report on NERC Level 2 Alert (March)
• Appointed Standards Drafting Team (March) 
• Hosted a webinar on the Large Load Action Plan (March) 
• Submitted a supplemental letter to FERC detailing an accelerated action plan (March)
--- PAGE 3 ---
Upcoming Engagement Opportunities 
Large Loads Working Group 
The Large Loads Working Group (LLWG) focuses on understanding the reliability impacts associated with emerging 
large loads. This includes identifying gaps in existing processes and recommending enhancements to planning 
and operations. The group will meet on July 16 and October 1. To join the LLWG, please contact Evan Mickelson.  
Load Modeling Working Group  
The Load Modeling Working Group (LMWG) actively engages stakeholders through technical presentations and 
discussions focused on modeling loads. The next LMWG meeting is scheduled for July 14 and the agenda includes 
approval for the Data Center Load Modeling Technical Reference, and the endorsement of the PERC2 model 
speciﬁcation. Additionally, a two-day workshop  is scheduled for September 15–16. To join the working group, 
please ﬁll this form.
Background: Addressing Large Loads on the Grid 
An increasing number of large commercial and industrial loads are rapidly connecting to the BPS. Computational 
loads, such as data centers (including cryptocurrency and artiﬁcial intelligence), present unique challenges in 
forecasting and planning for increased demand. To begin understanding large loads and identifying eﬀective 
pathways for their integration, NERC established the Large Loads Task Force in August 2024, now the Large Loads 
Working Group (LLWG) , and developed a work plan . Through extensive analysis, report development, and 
engagement conducted to date, NERC has determined that it must act now to mitigate the risks associated with 
large computational loads.  
Large Loads
Resources
2025
• Published an Incident Review: Considering Simultaneous Voltage-Sensitive Load Reductions (January)
• Hosted two workshops on mitigating risks from emerging large loads (June/July)
• Published Characteristics and Risks of Emerging Loads (July)
• Hosted a Large Loads panel at NERC’s Technical Session (August)
• Published a Level 2 NERC Alert urging industry participants to take speciﬁc actions. (September)
• Hosted a Load Modeling Workshop (October)
• Published a draft Reliability Guideline for comments (November)
• Submitted comments to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission’s Advance Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking (ANOPR) addressing the reliable interconnection of large loads (November).
