----- PAGE 1 -----
RELIABILITY | RESILIENCE | SECURITY  
POWERING TODAY.  PROTECTING TOMORROW.  
Implementation Plan 
Project 2026-02 Computational Loads 
Computational Load Interconnection, Studies, and Modeling CLO-001-1 
 
Applicable Standard(s)  
• CLO-001-1 Computational Load Interconnection, Studies, and Modeling 
• FAC-001-5 Facility Interconnection Requirements 
• FAC-002-5 Facility Interconnection Studies1 
 
Requested Retirement(s) 
• FAC-001-4 Facility Interconnection Requirements 
• FAC-002-4 Facility Interconnection Studies 
 
Prerequisite Standard(s) 
• None 
 
Applicable Entities  
• Computational Load Owner 
• Planning Coordinator 
• Transmission Planner 
• Transmission Owner that has a Computational Load Site interconnection or has a fully executed 
Agreement to conduct a study on the reliability impact of interconnecting a Computational Load Site 
• Distribution Provider that has a Computational Load Site interconnection or has a fully executed 
Agreement to conduct a study on the reliability impact of interconnecting a Computational Load Site 
• Generator Owner that has a Computational Load Site interconnection or has a fully executed 
Agreement to conduct a study on the reliability impact of interconnecting a Computational Load Site 
• Transmission Owner 
• Generator Owner with a fully executed Agreement to conduct a study on the reliability impact of 
interconnecting a third -party Facility to the Generator Owner’s existing Facility that is used to 
interconnect to the Transmission system. 
• Distribution Provider 
• Generator Owner 
 
1 The updates for FAC-001 and FAC-002 are intended as conforming clarifying edits.
----- PAGE 2 -----
Implementation Plan | Project 2026-02 | August 2026 2 
New Terms in the NERC Glossary of Terms  
This section includes all newly defined, revised, or retired terms used or eliminated in the NERC Reliability 
Standard. New or revised definitions listed below become approved when the proposed standard is approved. 
When the standard becomes effective, these defined terms will be removed from the individual standard and 
added to the Glossary.  
 
Proposed New Definition(s): 
Computational Load Owner (CLO): The entity that owns and maintains a Computational Load Site. 
 
Computational Load Site: One or more buildings, structures, or installations at a single location that: 
1) primarily contains information technology infrastructure used for: 
• creating, executing, and delivering software applications and services; 
• artificial intelligences training, deployment, and delivery; 
• cryptocurrency mining; or 
• other computational activities at a data center; and 
2) is supplied through electrical equipment that is connected to the Bulk-Power System. 
 
Background  
An increasing number of large commercial and industrial loads are rapidly connecting to the Bulk-Power System 
(BPS). Computational Load Sites, such as data centers (including cryptocurrency and artificial intelligence), 
present unique challenges in forecasting and planning for increased demand. Specifically, Computational Load 
Sites can be large and have unique operating characteristics, growth patterns, controls, and disturbance 
response behaviors. These characteristics can pose unique risks to the Bulk Power System as detailed in the 
NERC Large Load Task Force whitepaper “Characteristics and Risks of Emerging Large Loads” in July of 2025. 
 
Existing Reliability Standards provide important precedents and framework for maintaining the reliability of the 
BPS, but they were not developed specifically for this type of large load with its unique characteristics. The 
NERC Large Loads Working Group identified gaps in existing Reliability Standards in “Assessment of Gaps in 
Existing Practices, Requirements, and Reliability Standards for Emerging Large Loads ” and recommended 
development of new and/or updated Reliability Standards to address the unmitigated risks to the Bulk Power 
System. This need was also underscored in NERC’s “Aggregated Report on NERC Level 2 Industry 
Recommendation: Large Load Interconnection, Study, Commissioning, and Operations”. 
 
Therefore, Project 2026- 02 is establishing Reliability Standard CLO-001-1 to address the near-term essential 
actions needed to support the reliable integration of large Computational Load Sites onto the BPS. This project 
serves as a foundation to support Computational Load Site integration in a manner that supports a resilient and 
reliable BPS. 
 
Reliability Standard CLO-001-1 focuses on Reliability Standard requirements associated with interconnection 
requirements, including commissioning, interconnection studies and coordination, and transmission planning 
modeling data.
----- PAGE 3 -----
Implementation Plan | Project 2026-02 | August 2026 3 
 
General Considerations  
Reliability Standard CLO-001-1 is expected to have wide ranging impact on Computational Load Owners (CLOs); 
Transmission Owners ( TOs), Generation Owners ( GOs), Distribution Providers ( DPs) with interconnecting 
Computational Load Sites; and Transmission Providers ( TPs)/Planning Coordinators ( PCs) as interconnection 
requirements, study processes, and modeling data coordination would be required to be implemented for new 
Computational Load Sites and existing Computational Load Sites undergoing a qualiﬁed change. The 
implementation plan takes into account the criticality of interconnection requirements, study processes, and 
modeling data for Computational Loads to support the reliability of the BPS.  
 
Revisions to the FAC -001 and FAC -002 Reliability Standards are modest in nature and intended to avoid 
duplicative requirements for entities as it relates to the interconnection of Computational Load Sites.  
 
The Electric Reliability Organization ( ERO) enterprise acknowledges that CLOs are expected to be registered 
beginning in Year 2027 based on the planned Rules of Procedure (ROP) modiﬁcations and imminent FERC ﬁling. 
To ensure an orderly registration and compliance process for these entities, as well as fairness and consistency 
in the Reliability Standard’s application among similar asset types, this implementation plan provides additional 
time for new and existing registered entities to come into compliance with Reliability Standard CLO-001-1.  
 
This implementation plan provides that Reliability Standard CLO-001-1 and the deﬁnitions of Computational 
Load Site and Computational Load Owner would become eﬀective the ﬁrst day of the ﬁrst calendar quarter after 
regulatory approval, with a phased-in compliance timeline spanning nine (9) months following the eﬀective 
date.  
 
Entities will be required to comply with Requirements R1-R3 six (6) months after the effective date of Reliability 
Standard CLO-001-1. Requirements R1-R3 apply to existing Registered Entities (GO, TO, DP) and are an essential 
prerequisite to establishing interconnection requirements upon which other requirements are dependent. 
Therefore, these requirements have a nearer-term implementation than other requirements applicable to new 
Registered Entities (i.e., CLOs) or those that are dependent on the establishment of interconnection 
requirements. The compliance date for Requirements R1-R3 considers the time necessary to establish 
procedures to coordinate with other applicable functional entities in the creation of interconnection 
requirements for Computational Load Sites.  
 
Entities will be required to comply with Requirements R7  and R8 three (3) months after the effective date of 
Reliability Standard CLO-001. Requirements R7 and R8 apply to existing Registered Entities (TP, PC) and are an 
essential prerequisite to establishing the definition of qualified change and the development of modeling data 
specifications upon which other requirements are dependent. Therefore, these requireme nts have a nearer -
term implementation than other requirements applicable to new Registered Entities (i.e., CLOs) or those that 
are dependent on the establishment of a qualified change definition or modeling data specifications for 
Computational Load Sites.  The compliance date for Requirements R7 -R8 recognizes the criticality of these 
requirements to be in effect to initiate the development and provision of modeling data for Computational 
Load Sites that is fully aligned with the specified needs of the TP and PC. It also considers that these 
requirements have already been identified as essential actions to be performed by TPs and PCs in the NERC
----- PAGE 4 -----
Implementation Plan | Project 2026-02 | August 2026 4 
Level 3 Alert on “ Computational Load Modeling, Studies, Instrumentation, Commissioning, Operations, 
Protection, and Control” in May of 2026. 
 
Entities shall be required to comply with Requirements R4, R5, R6, R9, R10, and R11 nine (9) months after the 
effective date of Reliability Standard CLO -001-1. These requirements depend on new Registered Entities (i.e., 
CLOs) and the implementation of other requirements with earlier implementation contained within Reliability 
Standard CLO-001-1. The compliance date for these requirements recognizes the criticality of the provision of 
modeling data and coordination on interconnection studies , but also acknowledges that it may take up to six 
(6) months from the effective date of Requirements R7 and R8 to develop and provide modeling data for 
Computational Load Sites that is fully aligned with the specified needs of the TP and PC. 
 
Below is a demonstration of the phased-in compliance dates for Reliability Standard CLO-001-1: 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Simplified Phased-In Compliance Dates for Reliability Standard CLO-001-1 
 
 
Effective Dates and Phased-In Compliance Dates  
The effective date[s] for proposed Reliability Standard CLO-001-1 is provided below. Where the drafting team 
identified the need for a longer implementation period for compliance with a particular section of a proposed 
Reliability Standard (i.e., an entire Requirement or a portion thereof), the additional time for compliance with 
that section is specified below. The phased-in compliance date for those particular sections represents the date 
that entities must begin to comply with that particular section of the Reliability Standard, even where the 
Reliability Standard goes into effect at an earlier date. 
 
Reliability Standard CLO-001-1 and Definitions of Computational Load Site, Computational Load 
Owner 
Where approval by an applicable governmental authority is required, Reliability Standard CLO -001-1 and the 
deﬁnitions of Computational Load Site and Computational Load Owner shall become eﬀective on the ﬁrst day 
of the ﬁrst calendar quarter after the eﬀective date of the applicable governmental authority’s order approving 
the Reliability Standard, or as otherwise provided for by the applicable governmental authority.  
 
Where approval by an applicable governmental authority is not required, Reliability Standard CLO-001-1 and 
the deﬁnitions of Computational Load Site and Computational Load Owner shall become eﬀective on the ﬁrst
----- PAGE 5 -----
Implementation Plan | Project 2026-02 | August 2026 5 
day of the ﬁrst calendar quarter after the date the standard is adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees, or as 
otherwise provided for in that jurisdiction. 
 
Compliance Date for Reliability Standard CLO-001-1 Requirements R1 - R3 
Entities shall not be required to comply with Requirements R1, R2, and R3 until six (6) months after the eﬀective 
date of Reliability Standard CLO-001-1.  
 
Compliance Date for Reliability Standard CLO-001-1 Requirements R7 and R8 
Entities shall not be required to comply with Requirements R7 and R8 until three (3) months after the eﬀective 
date of Reliability Standard CLO-001-1.  
 
Compliance Date for Reliability Standard CLO-001-1 Requirements R4, R5, R6, R9, R10, and R11 
Entities shall not be required to comply with Requirements R4, R5, R6, R9, R10, and R11 until nine (9) months 
after the eﬀective date of Reliability Standard CLO-001-1.  
 
Reliability Standard FAC-001-5 
Where approval by an applicable governmental authority is required, the standard shall become eﬀective on 
the ﬁrst day of the ﬁrst calendar quarter after the eﬀective date of the applicable governmental authority’s 
order approving the standard, or as otherwise provided for by the applicable governmental authority.  
 
Where approval by an applicable governmental authority is not required, the standard shall become eﬀective 
on the ﬁrst day of the ﬁrst calendar quarter after the date the standard is adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees, 
or as otherwise provided for in that jurisdiction. 
 
Reliability Standard FAC-002-5 
Where approval by an applicable governmental authority is required, the standard shall become eﬀective on 
the ﬁrst day of the ﬁrst calendar quarter after the eﬀective date of the applicable governmental authority’s 
order approving the standard, or as otherwise provided for by the applicable governmental authority.  
 
Where approval by an applicable governmental authority is not required, the standard shall become eﬀective 
on the ﬁrst day of the ﬁrst calendar quarter after the date the standard is adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees, 
or as otherwise provided for in that jurisdiction. 
 
Retirement Dates  
 
Reliability Standards FAC-001-4 and FAC-002-4 
Reliability Standard s FAC -001-4 and FAC -002-4 shall be retired immediately prior to the effective date of 
Reliability Standards FAC-001-5 and FAC-002-5 in the particular jurisdiction in which the revised standards are 
becoming effective.
