--- PAGE 1 ---
Large Load Considerations 
 
Straw Proposal 
 
August 12, 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by: 
 
Danielle Mills 
Bill Weaver 
Sarah Goldmuntz  
 
California Independent System Operator
--- PAGE 2 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 2   
 
I. Executive Summary 
Serving the epicenter of the hyperscaler economy, the California Independent System 
Operator (CAISO) understands the need for new procedures to provide fast and reliable 
interconnection of new large loads. California faces a projected surge in electricity 
demand over the next decade, driven in part by new large loads such as data centers. 
The CAISO coordinates intensely with local, state and federal regulatory authorities, 
utilities, and stakeholders to ensure timely access to power for new large loads; 
anticipating surging demand, exploring the complexities of co-located and flexible loads, 
ensuring equitable cost allocation, and considering new technical requirements to 
account for changing operational profiles. These actions will ensure that CAISO and its 
Participating Transmission Owners (PTOs) facilitate economic growth and innovation 
without compromising the overall reliability or affordability of the system. 
This Large Loads Straw Proposal responds to the Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission (FERC) Order to Show Cause and illustrates the progress the CAISO has 
made in coordination with PTOs and other stakeholders in five key areas: 
A. Developing procedures to improve information visibility for operational awareness 
and new technical standards for continued reliability.  
B. Ensuring a workable framework for PTOs to develop just and reasonable deposit, 
financing, and other cost allocation structures within their tariffs. 
C. Establishing parallel information and application requirements for co-located 
arrangements in the CAISO’s generator interconnection process to align with 
PTO load interconnection studies. 
D. Creating a framework for two new interconnection services for flexible large 
loads, one interim and one permanent, to allow large loads to interconnect 
quickly to the transmission system either while waiting for network upgrade 
completion or to avoid network upgrade completion, respectively. 
E. Evaluating the need for a process to study generating facilities serving electrically 
proximate large loads. 
Respecting the current assignment of responsibilities for the system, this straw proposal 
addresses the topics for which the CAISO is responsible, which includes transmission 
planning, generator interconnection, and reliability of the CAISO system. Federal and 
state utility tariffs govern the study, interconnection, rates, and cost recovery for serving 
new loads. As such, the CAISO is coordinating closely with the PTOs and expects these 
proposals to continue to evolve as PTOs develop consistent and conforming policies 
and procedures under their transmission tariffs. In addition, the CAISO is closely 
coordinating with state and local regulatory authorities and looks forward to additional 
stakeholder feedback.
--- PAGE 3 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 3   
Table of Contents 
I. Executive Summary ...................................................................................................... 2 
1. Introduction and Background........................................................................................ 4 
A. Transmission Service to Eligible Customers on Behalf of Large Loads ... 7 
1. Definition of Large Load ...................................................................................... 8 
2. Large Load Application Process ....................................................................... 10 
3. Large Load Interconnection Study Procedures ............................................... 13 
4. Operational Requirements ................................................................................ 17 
5. Large Load Service Agreements ...................................................................... 24 
B. Cost Shifting Among Transmission Customers........................................ 25 
1. Roles and Responsibilities ................................................................................ 25 
2. Data Transparency ............................................................................................ 26 
C. Co-Location Arrangements and Load with Behind the Meter Generation28 
1. Terminology ....................................................................................................... 28 
2. Serving Co-Located Loads ............................................................................... 28 
3. Cost Allocation for Co-Located Loads .............................................................. 33 
D. Extending New Transmission Services to Eligible Customers Taking Service on 
Behalf of Flexible Large Loads ............................................................................... 36 
E. Interconnection Customers Serving Electrically Proximate Large Load and Co-
Located Load ........................................................................................................... 39 
2. Initiative Timeline and Next Steps .............................................................................. 40 
3. Decisional Classification ............................................................................................. 41
--- PAGE 4 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 4   
1. Introduction and Background 
This Large Loads Straw Proposal constitutes a major step forward for the CAISO and 
Participating Transmission Owners (PTOs) charting a course to enable development 
and interconnection of new large loads, including data centers and other computing 
loads, onto the CAISO system. The concepts proposed rest on a foundation of highly 
integrated planning and coordination among the CAISO, PTOs, state energy agencies, 
and local regulatory authorities, and provide a framework upon which the PTOs will 
layer their own processes to serve new large loads while upholding and reinforcing the 
CAISO’s commitment to reliability.   
 
The CAISO opened this stakeholder initiative with the intent of clarifying roles and 
responsibilities in anticipation of accelerating large load inquiries and load 
interconnection requests coming to the PTOs. In 2025, the CAISO began regular 
engagement with the PTOs and formed a Large Load Technical Requirements Working 
Group (LLTRWG) to explore possible technical standards to ensure reliable operations 
as new large loads interconnect to the CAISO system. The CAISO’s Issue Paper, 
posted in January 2026, described current roles, considerations, and processes for 
large loads, including transmission and resource planning, transmission service 
offerings, cost allocation and responsibility, technical requirements and standards, 
operational requirements, and related issues.1 The CAISO has continued to monitor and 
engage in state and federal regulatory discussions regarding large loads and explored 
central issues and procedural steps that require additional transparency or new 
products. On June 15, 2026, the CAISO issued a Large Loads Technical Requirements 
Straw Proposal on behalf of the LLTRWG in order to stay ahead of any potential 
operational concerns that large loads may present.  
 
On June 18, 2026, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC or the 
Commission) issued six tailored orders to show cause under Section 206 of the Federal 
Power Act to each of the six regional grid operators under its jurisdiction, including the 
CAISO. The order to show cause (Order) directed at CAISO focuses on five central 
concerns, all of which are addressed in this Straw Proposal. The CAISO met the first of 
the Commission’s compliance requirements with submission of an Informational Report 
on Resource Sufficiency, describing recent attention to resource adequacy, generation 
development, transmission expansion, and load and generator interconnection 
processes.2  
 
1  See CAISO Large Loads Issue Paper at https://www.caiso.com/documents/issue -paper-large-
load-consideration -jan-20-2026.pdf  
2  See CAISO Informational Report - Large Loads and Co -located Loads  at 
https://www.caiso.com/documents/jul-20-2026-informational -report-large-loads -and-co-located -loads -
el26-71.pdf .
--- PAGE 5 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 5   
 
As directed by the Commission, the CAISO is coordinating closely with state energy 
agencies to complement their regulatory proceedings, as well as with the PTOs to 
ensure a fair and consistent application of requirements and procedures across the 
CAISO system. Such consistency is critical to enabling reliable and timely 
interconnection, energization, and operations of new large loads. 
 
To anticipate and enable increasing load growth, the CAISO works with the state energy 
agencies, utilities, and stakeholders in its footprint. A 2022 Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) between the California Energy Commission (CEC), California 
Public Utilities Commission (CPUC), and the CAISO tightened the linkages between 
resource and transmission planning, interconnection, and procurement so California is 
equipped to meet its reliability needs and state energy policy objectives.3 This 
framework has allowed the CAISO and the PTOs to meet the increasing demand 
forecasted for the state. As of January 2026, the CEC forecasts that data center load in 
the CAISO-managed grid will increase by 1.8 gigawatts (GW) by 2030 and 4.7 GW by 
2035.4 The CAISO also is aware that utilities are receiving an increasing number of 
large load interconnection and service applications, and is committed to staying ahead 
of the curve, timely meeting new energy demand reliably and affordably.  
 
To date, California’s integrated resource planning efforts have resulted in more than 36 
GW of nameplate new generation and storage capacity coming online to serve CAISO 
load since 2020.5 The close coordination between the CAISO, state agencies, and local 
regulatory authorities on demand forecasts and resource planning provides a pathway 
for proactive transmission planning that anticipates emerging large load growth and 
aligns with resource needs to serve new loads.   
 
The current assignment of transmission responsibilities for the system under the 
CAISO’s operating control gives lead responsibilities for resource (generator and 
storage) interconnection and transmission planning to the CAISO, while utilities, 
 
3  See Memorandum of Understanding Between the California Public Utilities Commission and the 
California Energy Commission and the California Independent System Operator Regarding Transmission 
and Resource Planning and Implementation at https://www.caiso.com/Documents/ISO-CEC-and-CPUC-
Memorandum-of -Understanding-Dec-2022.pdf .  
4 California Energy Demand  2025 Hourly Forecast – CAISO – Planning Scenario: 
https://efiling.energy.ca.gov/GetDocument.aspx?tn=268127&DocumentContentId=105135   
5  See CPUC Resource Tracking Data Reports  at https://www.cpuc.ca.gov/industries -and-
topics/electrical-energy/summer-2021-reliability/tracking -energy-development/cpuc -resource-tracking-
data-reports
--- PAGE 6 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 6   
specifically the PTOs, hold the lead role for load connections.6 These relationships are 
set out in the FERC-approved tariffs of the CAISO and the PTOs and the CAISO 
transmission control agreement. To date, most of the load interconnections have been 
distribution-system connections informed by the utilities’ distribution system 
requirements, with third-party customer connections managed with the utilities. This 
structure has efficiently and effectively enabled the utilities to manage both their PTO 
responsibilities for transmission connections regulated by FERC and their state-
jurisdictional responsibilities for rates and charges that apply to end-use customers.  
 
However, the CAISO and the PTOs recognize that there is an increase in load 
interconnection requests for transmission-system connections that raise questions 
about the roles and responsibilities of the CAISO and the PTOs. FERC’s Order raises 
many of these questions. This straw proposal addresses the issues the Commission 
raises in the Order that directly pertain to the CAISO’s responsibilities to anticipate and 
plan for new additions to the CAISO system, provide transmission service, and maintain 
reliable operations of the grid. This straw proposal highlights several issues that will 
require significant coordination among the PTOs to develop consistent tariff policies and 
procedures that conform to the framework the CAISO proposes, respect the distinct 
roles of the CAISO versus the various types of PTOs, and comply with the requirements 
the Commission describes in the Order. 
 
This Large Loads Stakeholder Initiative will address all the issues in the Order. The 
CAISO is also conducting other stakeholder initiatives that will provide additional 
benefits to reliability, market efficiency, and affordability, as described below. These 
stakeholder initiatives include the CAISO’s ongoing work on: 
 
• Resource adequacy;  
• Demand and Distributed Energy Market Integration (DDEMI); and 
• Interconnection Process Enhancements. 
 
 
6  At times in this straw proposal , the CAISO will distinguish between utility responsibilities as 
‘participating transmission owner (PTO), utility distribution company (UDC), or load-serving entity, or load-
serving entity, as all carry different responsibilities depending on the type of load and regulatory topic in 
question. Utility distribution company refers to an entity that owns a distribution system for the delivery of 
energy to and from the CAISO-controlled grid, and that provides regulated retail electric service to Eligible 
Customers, as well as regulated procurement service to those end-use customers who are not yet eligible 
for direct access, or who choose not to arrange services through another retailer.  Participating 
Transmission Owner refers to a party to the Transmission Control Agreement who has placed its 
transmission assets and Entitlements under the CAISO’s Operational Control in accordance with the 
Transmission Control Agreement . Load-serving entities  are responsible for serving retail electricity 
customers and, in California, includes investor-owned utilities, community choice aggregators, publicly 
owned utilities , and electric service providers.
--- PAGE 7 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 7   
In addition to this Large Load Stakeholder Initiative and other related initiatives, the 
CAISO engages in state-level coordination efforts related to large loads as California 
agencies are implementing state law related to data centers and examining the 
implications of large loads in resource planning and procurement, interconnection, retail 
rate design, and energization,7 with open proceedings at the CPUC and in certain 
dockets at the CEC. 
 
The CAISO notes that the North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) is 
actively advancing industry-wide efforts to address reliability impacts of large loads, 
particularly large computational loads, such as data centers. In May 2026, NERC issued 
a Level 3 Essential Actions Alert addressing large-load modeling and data, system 
studies, commissioning, ride-through performance, and monitoring. In parallel, NERC 
Project 2026-02 – Large Loads is developing new and revised Reliability Standards to 
establish longer-term requirements in these areas. The CAISO is actively participating 
in these efforts and coordinating its large-load technical requirements with the evolving 
NERC framework.8 
 
The CAISO has an important role in planning for and maintaining reliable operations of 
the grid and in facilitating consistent approaches to large load interconnections among 
the PTOs. Considering the urgency of onboarding new large loads and the required 
timeline to submit a filing to FERC under Federal Power Act Section 205, the CAISO 
issues this straw proposal for stakeholder consideration. 
 
A. Transmission Service to Eligible Customers on Behalf of 
Large Loads 
The Commission directed the CAISO and the PTOs to either show cause as to why 
their FERC-jurisdictional tariffs remain just and reasonable and not unduly 
discriminatory or preferential without provisions addressing the five categories set out in 
the Order or explain what changes to their tariffs would remedy the identified concerns. 
The first category included provisions addressing the application process, study 
procedures, and ongoing operational requirements that apply to “Eligible Customers” 
seeking transmission service on behalf of large loads.9 
 
 
7  The CPUC refers to load interconnection as “energization.” 
8  See Large Load Technical Requirements - Straw Proposal at 
https://stakeholdercenter.caiso.com/InitiativeDocuments/Large -Load-Technical-Requirements-Straw-
Proposal -Jun-15-2026.pdf   
9 Order to Show Cause at P 3.
--- PAGE 8 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 8   
Below, the CAISO responds to the series of deficiencies the Commission identified 
related to this category. The CAISO agrees with the Commission that additional clarity 
and information requirements are necessary within the CAISO tariff, especially if interim 
or non-firm service is being considered to facilitate “speed-to-power,” or accelerated 
large load interconnections. Further, the CAISO encourages consistency among the 
PTOs in key areas related to large load interconnection application, study, and 
operations.    
 
In addition, the CAISO proposes a series of operational requirements, which it will 
continue to develop in coordination with the PTOs and the LLTRWG, and in parallel with 
the North American Electric Reliability Corporation’s (NERC) efforts to develop technical 
standards for the reliable operation of large loads. 
 
While recognizing some changes to the CAISO tariff are needed to address the 
Commission’s concerns with regard to the first category in the Order, the CAISO does 
not propose significant changes to the roles and responsibilities associated with large 
load interconnection applications or studies. T he current framework of shared 
responsibilities among the CAISO and the PTOs remains an efficient and effective 
mechanism to achieve the aims FERC outlines in the Order. The PTOs remain largely 
responsible for processing applications and studying new large loads and the CAISO 
remains responsible for reviewing those studies and ensuring alignment with 
transmission planning activities. The CAISO notes the importance of this clarity and 
consistency as it relates to large load interconnections and operations on the system 
and believes the proposed tariff enhancements below complement the load and 
resource planning process described in the December 2022 Memorandum of 
Understanding between the CAISO, CPUC, and CEC.10 The CAISO believes that this 
framework, with some clarification and new information requirements, as well as 
operational requirements, will address the concerns the Commission described in the 
first category in the Order. 
1. Definition of Large Load 
FERC noted in the Order that the CAISO and PTO tariffs lack a definition of large load, 
as a new category of load.11 The Commission directed the CAISO and PTOs to create 
an appropriate definition, including a load size and interconnection voltage threshold, 
based on the characteristics of CAISO’s transmission system. The Commission 
 
10  See Memorandum of Understanding Between the California Public Utilities Commission and the 
California Energy Commission and the California Independent System Operator Regarding Transmission 
and Resource Planning and Implementation at https://www.caiso.com/Documents/ISO-CEC-and-CPUC-
Memorandum-of -Understanding-Dec-2022.pdf .  
11  Order to Show Cause  at P 58.
--- PAGE 9 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 9   
suggested that a potentially reasonable definition would be “a new commercial or 
industrial customer, located at a single site behind one or more points of 
interconnection, and that has a peak load of 50 MW or greater, interconnects to the 
transmission system at a voltage level of greater than 69 kV, and is not part of a co-
location arrangement.”12 
 
Proposal 
 
The CAISO proposes to include a definition of “Large Load” in the CAISO tariff; 
however, the CAISO believes it may be premature to do so at this point, while NERC is 
developing similar, potentially overlapping, terms for computational loads. As such, the 
CAISO’s proposed definition may shift in the coming months to avoid regulatory 
conflicts between its definition and NERC’s. Aligning with future NERC standards will 
avoid creating dual or conflicting regulatory requirements for the same loads. 
Nevertheless, the CAISO can describe the principles it believes are helpful in defining 
large loads.  
 
The CAISO proposes that a potential definition could be: “An End User located at a 
single site interconnecting to the CAISO Controlled Grid, and that has a peak load of 50 
MW or greater.”13 Similar to generating facilities, the CAISO proposes to continue to 
adhere to FERC and California regulations on what considers a “site.” The CAISO has 
not seen developers try to game interconnection processes to avoid MW thresholds 
through de-aggregation, and the CAISO does not believe it is necessary to create 
additional rules to prevent such gaming on the load side. The CAISO expects the large 
load definition will adequately apply to large loads comprised of distinct loads, even if 
they have separate retail meters. Operationally, such loads would still have the same 
impact on the CAISO transmission system. 
 
This proposed definition differs from the Commission’s proposal in several respects. 
First, it does not include a description of the types of load (i.e., commercial or industrial 
customer). Notwithstanding that NERC standards may be further qualified to include 
specific types of loads, the CAISO does not believe that a large load definition should 
include descriptions of the types of load. This is for several reasons. For one, the 
CAISO does not want to create standards that result in false positives, false negatives, 
or disputes about what constitutes “commercial” or “industrial.”  
 
 
12  Id. at P 57. 
13  Appendix A to the CAISO tariff defines an End User as “ A consumer of electric power who 
consumes such power to satisfy a Load directly connected to the CAISO Controlled Grid, a Distribution 
System . . . .” It defines the CAISO Controlled Grid as “The system of transmission lines and associated 
facilities of the Participating TOs that have been placed under the CAISO’s Operational Control. ”
--- PAGE 10 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 10   
In addition, unless there is a relevant operational difference between the types of loads, 
specifying type is unnecessary. NERC is developing Computational Load standards that 
relate to reliability, which are mainly concerned with operational issues. The CAISO 
intends to follow and timely adopt any necessary tariff changes to implement new 
NERC operational standards for Computational Loads. The CAISO is not aware of long-
term transmission planning considerations that would apply specifically to 
Computational Loads that would not also apply to many, if not all, other types of Large 
Loads. If a specific type of large load does warrant specialized treatment, that can be 
added as an additional qualifier where that specialized treatment is called out.  
 
The CAISO’s proposed definition also omits a specific voltage level for the 
interconnection (FERC proposes interconnections at a voltage level greater than 69 kV). 
The CAISO does not believe this is necessary where the definition specifies the point of 
interconnection is with the CAISO controlled grid, as this effectively describes that the 
large load is transmission-connected, obviating the need to specify a voltage that could 
conflict with the existing transmission registration. 
 
The CAISO’s proposed definition also does not include FERC’s proposal that the 
definitions specify that the large load “is not part of a co-location arrangement.” The 
CAISO does not believe it is necessary to exclude large loads participating in co-
location arrangements from the definition of large loads. Although such loads will be 
subject to different tariff provisions than standalone large loads, they would still 
constitute large loads.  
 
Although the voltages of the distribution grid likely challenge large loads to interconnect, 
the CAISO recognizes that it could be possible for 50 MW loads to interconnect to the 
distribution grid. Nevertheless, the CAISO is focused on transmission-connected large 
loads at this time because they are the subject of FERC’s Order, and because the 
transmission grid represents the likely interconnection point for the vast majority of large 
loads. This initiative will thus focus on transmission interconnections, and the Demand 
and Distributed Energy Resource Integration (DDEMI) initiative and other CAISO 
stakeholder initiatives will continue to work on distribution-related enhancements. 
2. Large Load Application Process 
The Commission suggested that the CAISO and the PTOs lack clear and consistent 
provisions establishing the application process and study procedures that will be used 
when the CAISO and/or the PTOs evaluate the provision of transmission service to 
Eligible Customers on behalf of large loads, including an application process,
--- PAGE 11 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 11   
application fee and readiness requirements, and information and data requirements.14 
The Order also suggested that the CAISO and PTO tariffs lack appropriate study 
provisions to recognize the unique operational characteristics of large loads that are 
willing and able to limit their energy withdrawals under certain conditions to lessen or 
avoid the need for network upgrades.15 
 
In addition, the Commission noted that accurate models using Electromagnetic 
Transient studies may help to ensure that transmission service needed on behalf of 
large loads can be provided without compromising reliability and suggests clarity and 
consistency in the evaluation of alternative transmission technologies (ATTs) as 
potential solutions to accommodate an eligible customer’s request for transmission 
service on behalf of a large load.16 To the extent that traditional network upgrades are 
selected over ATTs, the Commission recommended demonstration of why ATTs were 
not selected.17 
 
Finally, the Commission directed the CAISO and the PTOs to explain whether their 
tariffs sufficiently address identification of Direct Assignment Facilities and Network 
Upgrades (as the Order defines) necessary to reliably provide transmission service to 
Eligible Customers on behalf of large loads; include provisions for a 60-90-day timeline 
to study the unique operational characteristics of large loads; and include a study 
deadline to assess large loads.18 
 
Proposal 
 
The CAISO reiterates that the existing load interconnection process is conducted 
efficiently and effectively by the PTOs. For this reason, the CAISO proposes enhanced 
and ongoing coordination with the PTOs on the load and resource interconnection 
processes and expects the PTOs to align application processes in order to ensure the 
level of visibility necessary for the CAISO to plan for new large loads and maintain 
reliability once they are interconnected.  
 
Within that division of responsibilities, the CAISO agrees with the Commission’s 
concerns in the Order that information in the large load interconnection study process 
regarding a large load’s willingness to limit energy withdrawals under certain conditions 
is important for the CAISO’s planning and operational purposes. To that end, the CAISO 
expects the PTOs to develop consistent study procedures to be completed within 60 to 
 
14  Order to Show Cause at P 58. 
15  Id. at P 59. 
16  Id. 
17  Id. at P 61. 
18  Id. at P 62.
--- PAGE 12 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 12   
90 days to enable this flexibility. In addition, the CAISO proposes a number of data 
requirements for the large load interconnection study procedures, described in Section 
A.4, to ensure the CAISO has the necessary information to account for such flexibility. 
 
The CAISO proposes a framework for agreements under which large loads commit to 
limiting energy withdrawals under the flexible load interconnection service offerings 
described in Section D of this straw proposal. However, regarding the load application 
process, the CAISO suggests that the PTOs develop consistent application processes, 
study requirements, and agreements to ensure sufficient transparency in the load 
application and study process.  It is important for the PTOs to maintain some degree of 
consistency in their respective tariffs so the CAISO has a greater certainty around the 
consistency of data and operational details received by the PTOs in the load 
applications. 
 
The CAISO currently evaluates myriad alternative transmission technologies in its 
transmission planning process, which is the primary process through with the CAISO 
ensures service to new large load interconnection requests. The CAISO’s evaluation 
routinely includes static synchronous compensators, static VAR compensators19, 
advanced power flow control devices, transmission switching, synchronous condensers, 
voltage source converters, advanced conductors, and tower lifting. The CAISO 
understands that transmission providers must consider ATTs at all times. As a 
transmission provider, the CAISO must include in the generator interconnection cluster 
study report an explanation of the results of the evaluation of the enumerated alternative 
transmission technologies for feasibility, cost, and time savings as an alternative to a 
traditional network upgrade.  
 
Therefore the CAISO supports and has broadly adopted the practice of duly considering 
and assigning ATTs to meet identified system needs, including when triggered by new 
loads interconnecting to the CAISO grid. The CAISO documents consideration of such 
technologies in its annual Transmission Plan. This has been the practice in CAISO for 
several years and was recently memorialized in the CAISO’s tariff in compliance with 
FERC Order Nos. 2023 and 1920 (pending FERC approval).20 To respond to the Order 
and the large load interconnection context specifically, the CAISO proposes to clarify 
these considerations through consistent tariff language in the CAISO tariff, which the 
CAISO expects the PTOs will similarly include in their tariffs. Rather than providing 
standardized documentation of the detailed rationale each time a traditional 
transmission technology is approved over the use of ATTs, the CAISO proposes to 
continue to report annually on the approvals of ATTs within each transmission plan. The 
 
19  VAR refers to voltampere reactive, which is the unit used to measure reactive power in an AC 
electrical grid.  
20  See, e.g., Section 6.2 of Appendix KK to the CAISO tariff.
--- PAGE 13 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 13   
ISO will continue to set out the alternatives that were considered in the selection of all 
preferred transmission solutions, whether ATTs or other more conventional solutions, to 
the reasonable depth necessary given the nature of the transmission need. This 
approach has worked well in the generator interconnection study process, enabling the 
consideration and use of ATTs and grid enhancing technologies without slowing down 
studies. 
 
With regard to the Commission’s ATTs-related modeling requirements, the CAISO 
coordinates annually with the transmission owners during the annual transmission 
planning process on the feasibility of ATTs, particularly evaluating the application of 
advanced conductors and flow control devices. The CAISO notes that Dynamic Line 
Rating (DLR) refers to a transmission line rating varying based on local conditions, such 
as ambient air temperature, wind speed, cloud cover, solar heating, and precipitation, 
etc., rather than a static rating assumption. DLRs can provide additional capacity for a 
transmission line. In the CAISO's production cost simulation, many congestions were 
observed in the evening time or in lower-temperature months. Such congestion can be 
potentially mitigated or reduced by adopting DLRs for the lines. In the CAISO’s most 
recent planning cycle, DLRs were not modeled in production cost modeling cases, since 
it not only requires operational history data of weather conditions and line ratings, but 
also requires software and modeling enhancement to accommodate the data in 
production cost model. The CAISO is coordinating with the PTOs, WECC, and the 
software vendor of GridView to explore the feasibility and possibility of implementing 
dynamic line rating in production cost models in future planning cycles. 
 
As a general matter, the CAISO recognizes that the Order implicates various types of 
PTOs, including non-load-serving PTOs and approved project sponsors that could be 
impacted by large load interconnection requests but are not load-serving entities and do 
not have retail interconnection tariffs. The CAISO expects the PTOs to work together to 
clarify and develop complementary roles and responsibilities in their respective tariffs 
regarding requests for interconnections to non-load-serving PTO facilities.   
3. Large Load Interconnection Study Procedures 
The Commission highlighted a lack of clarity and consistency regarding the study of 
provision of transmission service to Eligible Customers on behalf of large loads.21 
Further, the Commission noted that, while it does not seek to alter the allocation of 
rights and responsibilities between CAISO and PTO tariffs, the CAISO’s and PTO’s 
tariffs may not clearly specify which entity will be responsible for studying the provision 
 
21  Order to Show Cause at P 51.
--- PAGE 14 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 14   
of transmission service to Eligible Customers on behalf of large loads.22 The Order 
suggested that additional study considerations may be necessary to address the unique 
operational and reliability challenges that providing transmission service to eligible 
customers on behalf of large loads presents to the transmission system.23 The 
Commission noted that clear and consistent study processes may be necessary to fully 
capture the transmission system impacts of providing such transmission service, which 
could result in significant operational risks for the transmission system,24 and suggested 
that tariff provisions may prevent disputes over a variety of issues, e.g. study timelines 
and delays, how the transmission service needed on behalf of the large load is studied, 
what types of network upgrades are considered, and how required network upgrades to 
provide the requested transmission service are determined.25  
 
Finally, the Commission suggested that the CAISO and PTO tariffs fail to deter 
speculative or duplicative requests for transmission service by Eligible Customers on 
behalf of large loads.26 
 
Proposal 
The CAISO proposes to clarify in its tariff that the current process requires load 
interconnection requests to be submitted to the appropriate PTO pursuant to the PTO 
tariffs. The CAISO currently accounts for those load interconnection requests in the 
CAISO’s transmission planning process (TPP) and to some extent in the CAISO 
Resource Interconnection Standards (RIS). The CAISO proposes both clarifying and 
continuing this process in its tariff. In addition, the CAISO proposes enhanced data 
sharing and process alignment between the CAISO and the PTOs to further streamline 
the load interconnection request and study process. 
 
As noted earlier in this straw proposal, the CAISO does not propose changing the 
allocation of rights and responsibilities for studying large load interconnection requests 
from the framework in place today: the PTOs will continue to manage the bulk of the 
study responsibilities. This has been a highly efficient and effective process, to date, 
and the CAISO expects that it can continue to be so with the influx of large load 
interconnection requests. The CAISO encourages the PTOs to align their load 
interconnection study procedures among themselves and with the CAISO resource 
interconnection standards and transmission planning processes for enhanced clarity 
 
22  Id. at P 51.  
23  Id. at P 52.   
24  Id. at P 53. 
25  Id. at P 54. 
26  Id. at P 55.
--- PAGE 15 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 15   
and consistency for customers, to fully capture the transmission system impacts of 
providing such transmission service by applying consistent study parameters, and to 
minimize operational risks to the system through a common study framework.  
 
The CAISO agrees with the Commission and proposes some tariff enhancements to 
ensure greater coordination and visibility between the CAISO and PTOs regarding the 
load interconnection study results. This will require continued coordination with the 
PTOs during the study process, and will be particularly important for co-located loads 
and generation, discussed in Section C of this straw proposal, as well as with the 
provision of flexible interim load interconnection (FILI) service, discussed further in 
Section D of this straw proposal. 
 
The CAISO acknowledges multiple possible configurations of large loads and co-
located loads, each of which may necessitate unique information to fully mitigate 
operational or reliability concerns. These various configurations are described in Section 
C of this straw proposal on co-located loads. Each will have different implications on the 
CAISO’s generator interconnection study requirements. Co -located loads with exporting 
generation (existing or new), for example, will need parallel review by the CAISO and 
the relevant PTO.  
 
Thus, the CAISO proposes a new requirement for co-located loads and generation to 
provide comprehensive information on both the load and generation in the CAISO’s 
resource interconnection process, in addition to the PTO load interconnection 
application process. The CAISO proposes to establish procedures for the CAISO and 
PTOs to exchange and compare information to ensure the respective studies of the load 
and generator are consistent with the customer’s requested mode of operation and type 
of service requested.   
 
In light of the need for coordination between the CAISO’s resource interconnection 
study process (in which the studies are conducted primarily by the PTOs) and load 
interconnection studies, the CAISO expects PTOs to propose enhanced alignment of 
their load interconnection request windows and study timelines with the CAISO 
processes. This is needed for all the information to be communicated back to the 
CAISO in a timely and consistent manner to inform the CAISO’s broader transmission 
planning, resource interconnection, and deliverability allocation procedures. The CAISO 
notes that its resource interconnection timeline and transmission planning timelines are 
relatively bound in its tariff as required by FERC Order Nos. 2023, 1000, and 1920, and 
the MOU with the California state energy agencies. Therefore, the CAISO expects the 
PTOs will need to update their tariffs to align study processes with one another and in 
consideration of other related CAISO processes.
--- PAGE 16 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 16   
 
To ensure clarity on behalf of stakeholders, the CAISO encourages the PTOs to 
establish tariff revisions describing study timelines and procedures for the transmission 
service needed on behalf of large loads, types of network upgrades considered, and 
methods to determine required network upgrades to provide the requested transmission 
service.27 The CAISO believes that a high degree of consistency would be useful across 
PTO tariffs to ensure timeline alignment, process efficiencies, and utility of data. In 
addition, the CAISO proposes to define in its tariff any instances when the CAISO would 
reject load interconnection study results or decline to consider or approve associated 
transmission solutions through the TPP; these conditions include instances when PTO 
study results indicate high operational risk or uncertainty, or would interfere with CAISO 
compliance with balancing authority, transmission operator, or reliability coordinator 
reliability standards.   
 
The most effective way to ensure load associated with new large load interconnections 
is reflected in CAISO’s TPP is to work with CEC to reflect this new load in CEC’s 
demand forecast before CEC finalizes its forecast in the December timeframe each 
year. While the aim is for load forecasts incorporated into CAISO’s TPP to include all 
anticipated load, there are instances where new load seeks to interconnect after 
development of the demand forecast and CPUC resource portfolios that the CAISO 
incorporates into its TPP. Currently, to address these instances, the PTOs may submit 
proposals for the CAISO’s concurrence in the transmission plan. The concurrence for 
load interconnections only considers the transmission component of the load 
interconnection (i.e., the network upgrades). The CAISO reviews and provides 
concurrence that the load interconnection and potential network upgrades to 
interconnect the load meet the transmission reliability requirements and are consistent 
with the long-term transmission plans in the area.  
 
To address FERC’s Order, the CAISO proposes to clarify within its tariff how the 
concurrence process addresses local network needs associated with large load 
interconnections. The concurrence process provides important validation of the 
assumptions used in planning and confirms that proposed load interconnections and 
associated network upgrades do not create adverse reliability impacts to the regional 
system. The concurrence process also helps ensure that new infrastructure is 
appropriately sized, timed, and initiated based on credible and coordinated planning to 
meet forecasted load growth. The CAISO’s planning framework identifies and mitigates 
area-wide impacts driven by significant new load growth. In parallel, the PTOs continue 
to advance the local and interconnection-driven network upgrades needed to reliably 
serve retail customers and safely integrate new large loads under the PTOs’ obligation 
 
27  Id. at P 54.
--- PAGE 17 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 17   
to serve them. This coordinated approach, whereby the CAISO addresses area-wide 
impacts through the Transmission Planning Process and PTOs advance local network 
reinforcements associated with load interconnections through the load interconnection 
process, is essential to facilitating the timely integration of new loads and minimizing 
reliance on operational workarounds. Thus, the CAISO proposes to clarify in its tariff the 
purpose and approach of the concurrence process in context of large loads. The CAISO 
proposes to specify in its tariff the conditions under which load interconnection requests 
would be considered for concurrence to ensure reliability and consistency with long-
term plans. 
 
As discussed in Section A.2, (Large Load Application Process), the CAISO requests 
that the PTOs clarify in their tariffs the responsibilities of non -load serving PTOs’ 
facilities receiving load interconnection applications from the load-serving entity, and 
which party will lead the study process.   
 
Regarding FERC’s concerns regarding speculative or duplicative large load 
interconnection requests, t he CAISO agrees that its tariff does not deter such requests 
per se but suggests that the responsibility to do so is more appropriately held by the 
PTOs and therefore should be addressed through revisions to the PTOs’ tariffs. For 
CAISO planning purposes, the CAISO notes that the CEC’s Integrated Energy Policy 
Report (IEPR) long-term demand forecast includes information on applications for 
service submitted to utilities and applies adjustments to requested capacity based on 
utilization factors, confidence levels, and ramping assumptions.9 Confidence levels are 
determined based on the status of project applications. If projects have signed 
agreements with the utility for electric service, they are included in the highest 
confidence group. The CEC demand forecast projects capacity and energy needs of 
new loads; and these new loads have been incorporated into the statewide planning 
processes for the past several years. The state’s integrated resource planning and the 
CAISO’s TPP incorporate this information. This is one mechanism to guard against 
speculative or duplicative large load interconnection requests forming the basis of 
infrastructure planning in the CAISO. Additional mechanisms may be appropriate in the 
PTOs’ tariffs. 
4. Operational Requirements  
The Commission preliminarily found in the Order that the CAISO’s and PTOs’ tariffs 
appear to be unjust and unreasonable because they lack provisions addressing ongoing 
operational requirements for Eligible Customers taking transmission service on behalf of 
large loads.28 The Commission enumerated specific examples, including the lack of 
 
28  Order to Show Cause at P 63.
--- PAGE 18 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 18   
provisions governing hourly forecasts, telemetry data, equipment to enable the CAISO 
to monitor large loads; requiring the transmission customer to enable the CAISO to 
remotely disconnect large loads when necessary to maintain reliability; ramp rate or 
ride-through requirements; and control technologies and/or protection systems that may 
be necessary to limit eligible customer’s withdrawals from the transmission system.29 
 
Proposal  
 
The CAISO agrees that the operational requirements the Commission identifies in the 
Order are necessary. The CAISO has been exploring these issues through discussions 
with PTO representatives in the LLTRWG, which the CAISO formed in 2025, and 
through engagement with NERC. The LLTRWG was established by the CAISO and 
utilities interconnecting large loads to develop consistent technical requirements for the 
reliable interconnection and operation of large data center loads connected to the 
CAISO-controlled grid. The resulting Large Load Technical Requirements Straw 
Proposal, released on June 15, 2026, focuses on the technical characteristics needed 
to maintain system reliability as large data center loads, including AI-training data 
centers, continue to grow within the CAISO footprint.30 The Large Loads Technical 
Requirements Straw Proposal complements broader stakeholder efforts addressing 
planning, transmission service, market, and operational considerations, and is intended 
to remain aligned with evolving NERC Reliability Standards and industry practices.  
 
The Large Loads Technical Requirements Straw Proposal proposes technical 
requirements in the following areas, which the CAISO intends to continue to further 
develop through ongoing discussions with the LLTRWG and based on stakeholder 
comments to this Large Loads Stakeholder Initiative: 
 
• Frequency ride-through  
• Voltage ride-through  
• Ramp-rate limitations  
• Monitoring and telemetry  
• Post-fault active power recovery  
• Modeling data requirements  
• Commissioning, including data verification and model validation  
 
The Large Loads Technical Requirements Straw Proposal is intended to establish 
technical reliability requirements for the reliable interconnection and operation of large 
 
29  Id. 
30  See Large Load Technical Requirements - Straw Proposal at 
https://stakeholdercenter.caiso.com/InitiativeDocuments/Large -Load-Technical-Requirements-Straw-
Proposal -Jun-15-2026.pdf
--- PAGE 19 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 19   
loads. Many of the proposed requirements address the technical operational concerns 
the Commission identifies in the Order. The Large Loads Technical Requirements Straw 
Proposal also identifies areas for which the LLTRWG is currently developing technical 
requirements that the Commission does not mention in the Order, including low- and 
high-frequency cycling, constant power operation, power quality, dynamic reactive 
power support, phase-angle jump ride-through, protection requirements, and other 
emerging technical considerations. 
 
The following table summarizes the relationship between the Large Loads Technical 
Requirements Straw Proposal and the operational requirements noted in the 
Commission’s Order. 
 
Operational Requirement 
Identified in FERC Order to 
Show Cause (P63) 
Current 
Technical 
Requirements 
Straw 
Proposal 
Status 
Comments 
Establish ramp-rate 
requirements for large loads. Addressed 
The Large Loads Technical 
Requirements Straw Proposal 
includes ramp-rate limitations as one 
of the proposed technical 
requirements to reduce reliability 
impacts associated with rapid 
changes in large load demand. 
Establish ride-through 
requirements for large loads. Addressed 
The Large Loads Technical 
Requirements Straw Proposal 
includes both frequency ride-through 
and voltage ride-through requirements 
intended to improve system reliability 
during disturbances. 
Specify control technologies 
and/or protection systems 
necessary to limit large load 
withdrawals from the 
transmission system when 
appropriate. 
Addressed 
The Large Loads Technical 
Requirements Straw Proposal 
identifies that protective systems may 
include automated schemes designed 
to reduce or disconnect portions of the 
large load during abnormal system 
conditions.
--- PAGE 20 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 20   
Operational Requirement 
Identified in FERC Order to 
Show Cause (P63) 
Current 
Technical 
Requirements 
Straw 
Proposal 
Status 
Comments 
Require installation of phasor 
measurement units (PMUs) or 
similar high-speed monitoring 
equipment, with associated 
costs assigned to the 
transmission customer. 
Partially 
Addressed 
The Large Loads Technical 
Requirements Straw Proposal 
includes monitoring and telemetry 
requirements, including PMUs and 
Digital Fault Recorders (DFRs), but 
does not specify cost allocation. 
Require hourly forecasts, 
telemetry, and other operational 
data to provide CAISO sufficient 
operational visibility. 
Not Addressed 
The Large Loads Technical 
Requirements Straw Proposal 
includes monitoring and telemetry 
requirements to improve operational 
visibility. However, it does not 
establish hourly forecasting 
requirements or define data exchange 
requirements and communication 
protocols. 
Enable CAISO to remotely 
disconnect large loads when 
necessary to maintain 
transmission system reliability. 
Not Addressed 
The Large Loads Technical 
Requirements Straw Proposal does 
not enable CAISO to remotely 
disconnect large loads. 
Establish requirements for 
maintaining communication 
channels between CAISO and 
transmission customers serving 
large loads. 
Not Addressed 
The Large Loads Technical 
Requirements Straw Proposal does 
not address the operational 
communication requirements. 
 
From the table above, the CAISO identifies four operational requirements the Order 
includes that have not been fully addressed by the Large Loads Technical 
Requirements Straw Proposal. The CAISO proposes adoption of these requirements to 
address these gaps:  
• Installation of phasor measurement units (PMUs) or similar high-speed 
monitoring equipment, with associated costs assigned to the transmission 
customer;
--- PAGE 21 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 21   
• Hourly forecasts, telemetry, and other operational data to provide the CAISO 
sufficient operational visibility;  
• Enable the CAISO to remotely disconnect large loads when necessary to 
maintain transmission system reliability; and 
• Establish requirements for maintaining communication channels between the 
CAISO and transmission customers serving large loads. 
 
The LLTRWG continues to refine the technical requirements based on stakeholder 
feedback, additional system studies, operating experience, and the ongoing 
development of NERC Reliability Standards for computational loads. As the work 
progresses, the CAISO and participating utilities will determine the appropriate 
implementation mechanisms. Depending on the nature of each requirement, 
implementation may occur via changes to the CAISO tariff, PTOs’ tariffs, utility 
interconnection handbooks, Business Practices Manuals, and/or future NERC Reliability 
Standards, providing a coordinated framework for reliable integration of large loads 
within the CAISO-controlled grid.  
 
For example, depending on the results of large load interconnection studies, the 
relevant PTO may require additional monitoring, control, or protective systems beyond 
those required by the CAISO to maintain reliability. Such systems may include 
automated schemes designed to reduce or disconnect portions of the large load during 
abnormal system conditions. The CAISO notes that it does not have direct control of 
switches, so the PTOs would need to make sure they have control at the right level. In 
other words, these requirements would be implemented at the PTO rather than at the 
CAISO level. 
 
To ensure the ongoing visibility and operational control necessary to provide reliable 
transmission service, the CAISO also proposes tariff provisions enabling data 
exchanges with the PTOs and load-serving entities to ensure access to the following 
large load interconnection information. Static information about the large loads will come 
from the PTOs near the end of the interconnection process (similar to the new resource 
implementation process for generators). Day-ahead and real-time information will come 
from the load-serving entity scheduling coordinator responsible for the large load’s 
demand.31  
 
 
31  The CAISO does not propose that the large load be required to have its own scheduling 
coordinator, nor that large loads be considered as their own load -serving entities. Rather, large load 
demand would be scheduled by their load-serving entity similar to non-large load demand, and that same 
load-serving entity would report any material data for the large load. If the large load participates in a 
CAISO demand response program, then it would a demand response provider and scheduling 
coordinator to represent it in the CAISO mar kets.
--- PAGE 22 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 22   
For each large load, the CAISO proposes to require the following information from the 
PTOs during, or at the end of, the interconnection process: 
• Information on whether the eligible customer is enrolled in a flexible 
interconnection program, described below in Section D of this straw proposal 
• Load type 
• Variable or flat load designation 
• Expected hourly operating profile 
• Location of service 
• Point of delivery 
• Connected capacity 
• Minimum operating level 
• Maximum operating level 
• Utility program information  
• Any market participation status or expected participation in demand response 
programs 
• Maximum operating demand 
• Minimum operating demand 
• Curtailment capability 
• Expected hourly flexibility capability 
• Ramp-up capability 
• Ramp-down capability 
• Expected operating information sufficient to characterize expected load behavior 
• For co-located generation that is not exporting or CAISO-participating, all 
generation characteristics 
 
The PTO will be expected to inform the CAISO of any material changes after 
energization. Any co-located participating generators will still go through the CAISO 
interconnection and new resource implementation process.  
 
Additionally, the CAISO proposes that the large load’s load-serving entity’s scheduling 
coordinator will provide the CAISO with the following data specific to each large load:
--- PAGE 23 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 23   
• Forecast submission requirements,32 which will be incorporated into applicable 
balancing authority area demand forecasts and operational studies: 
o Hourly forecasts of expected load consumption for the Operating Day and 
a rolling 7-day period following the Operating Day 
o Day Ahead Forecasts to be submitted no later than 0700 prevailing Pacific 
time on the day prior to the Operating Day 
o Forecasts at the individual large load identifier level 
• Real-time forecast updates: Updated forecasts whenever expected consumption 
of the large load materially deviates from previously submitted day-ahead 
forecasts, including: 
o Expected energization activities 
o Material changes in operations 
o Curtailments 
o Facility outages 
o Co-located generation impacts on the load forecast 
o Other known events affecting expected consumption 
• Telemetry data:  
o Operational status 
o Real-time consumption 
• Expected outages: 
o Planned outages 
o Forced outages 
o De-rates 
o Other operating conditions that materially affect expected consumption 
 
As described above, the CAISO generally proposes to obtain large load data from the 
PTOs during the interconnection process and the load-serving entities representing the 
large load’s demand in market timeframes. At this time the CAISO does not propose to 
require large loads to have their own scheduling coordinator or other direct relationship 
with the CAISO; however, this framework may need to change to remain consistent with 
ultimate NERC requirements for computational loads.  
 
The CAISO also notes that it will require the PTO, load-serving entity, and large load to 
work with the CAISO to provide all available data on any reliability event. Similar to 
participating generator requirements, this requirement will ensure the CAISO, utilities, 
regulators, NERC, and WECC have sufficient data to conduct meaningful post-event 
analyses. 
 
32  The CAISO tariff will establish conditions under which an interconnecting transmission operator 
must obtain a schedule/forecast from the eligible customer to provide to the CAISO.
--- PAGE 24 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 24   
 
The CAISO also notes that to the extent that software changes are necessary, the 
CAISO may need additional time beyond 2026 to select a vendor, and to develop and 
implement the product; however, the CAISO would seek to implement any software 
changes in 2027.  
5. Large Load Service Agreements  
The Commission preliminarily found in the Order that the CAISO and PTO tariffs lack 
pro forma provisions in a transmission service agreement, or other applicable 
agreement, to memorialize the technical and operational terms the Order describes.33  
 
Proposal 
 
The CAISO agrees with the Commission’s preliminary finding and expects the PTOs to 
develop a consistent pro forma agreement. At this time, it is not clear whether the 
CAISO should always be a signatory to a three-party agreement for large load 
interconnections. For example, the CAISO likely would not have any roles or 
responsibilities for the financing and construction of simple network upgrades needed 
for large loads receiving firm interconnection service. Such arrangements could be 
effectuated through a two-party interconnection agreement between the PTO and the 
large load developer, as performed today. On the other hand, for a large load 
requesting non-firm interconnection service, the PTO may need the CAISO to help 
memorialize and sign on to the operational procedures necessary to provide that 
service through new pro forma non-firm service agreements or utilizing the PTO’s two-
party interconnection agreement. For co -located large loads with exporting generation, 
the CAISO will need to be a party to a pro forma agreement that bridges the pro forma 
Large Generator Interconnection Agreement (LGIA) with the pro forma large load 
interconnection agreement or negotiate a non-conforming LGIA to account for certain 
details of the co-located large load interconnection on an individual basis. The 
developer also would be expected to execute a CAISO pro forma Participating 
Generator Agreement for the generator, but not a Participating Load Agreement for the 
large load.34 
 
 
33  Order to Show Cause at P 64. 
34  The Participating Load Agreement is for loads receiving wholesale service, which are not relevant 
to this initiative at this time.
--- PAGE 25 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 25   
B. Cost Shifting Among Transmission Customers 
1. Roles and Responsibilities 
The Commission laid out key objectives regarding cost allocation of network upgrades 
associated with Eligible Customers taking transmission service on behalf of large loads: 
improved transparency regarding the assignment of network upgrades and their 
associated costs; and development of a pro forma cost recovery agreement between 
the CAISO, the relevant PTO, and the eligible customer taking transmission service on 
behalf of large loads. The Commission states that improved transparency will provide 
important information to state public utility commissions and other state regulators, 
enabling them to identify which transmission costs are caused by which transmission 
customers in order to appropriately sub-allocate costs at the retail level. According to 
the Commission, a pro forma cost recovery agreement would ensure that Eligible 
Customers bear the risk and are ultimately responsible for the costs incurred to provide 
transmission service, including the cost of network upgrades.  
 
Proposal 
 
The CAISO agrees that the objectives the Order outlines are foundational to preventing 
cost shifting among transmission customers and to ensuring that large loads bear 
equitable risk and responsibility for costs incurred to interconnect, including the cost of 
network upgrades. The CAISO shares these objectives and understands the importance 
of maintaining affordability while addressing large load integration. 
 
The CAISO sees value in development of a pro forma cost recovery agreement and is 
working closely with the PTOs, which are leading the development of this agreement, 
and cost allocation rules generally.35 The CAISO believes it is prudent for cost allocation 
rules to be set forth in the PTO tariffs rather than the CAISO tariff. As discussed herein, 
the PTOs will continue to manage large load interconnections through their tariffs. The 
PTOs also have a direct relationship with their retail ratepayers and the regulators of 
those ultimate rates, including the CPUC. Additionally, the PTOs have worked on these 
cost allocation issues and have more expertise in cost allocation than the CAISO, 
including on large loads. Finally, it is the PTOs that will construct and own the network 
upgrades. As such, the CAISO does not propose to issue a “top-down” cost allocation 
solution through its own tariff. The CAISO proposes some metering and settlement 
changes in Section C of the tariff to account for co-located large loads and generation.  
 
 
35  The cost recovery agreement could be part of the pro forma load interconnection agreement. 
They are discussed separately here because the Order to Show Cause discusses them as separate 
issues.
--- PAGE 26 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 26   
The CAISO recognizes the primary role of the PTOs in establishing just and reasonable 
provisions in their tariffs applicable to the eligible customer taking transmission service 
on behalf of the end-use customer in order to prevent cost shifting among 
customers. The CAISO appreciates the concern that while each PTO’s tariff is 
applicable to the Eligible Customers taking service from that PTO, including a separate 
mechanism in each PTO tariff does not directly avoid cost shifting between different 
PTOs depending on the relative number of large loads served and the specific PTO 
tariffs ultimately developed. This is, according to those expressing such concern , 
because the CAISO recovers high-voltage transmission costs through a single regional 
transmission access charge based on the individual PTOs’ transmission revenue 
requirements, which may include the cost of network upgrades triggered by new large 
loads.  
 
The CAISO notes that at this time, the inputs into the total revenue requirement 
recovered through the regional transmission access charge are directly influenced by 
construction contributions that offset the transmission rate base upon which a PTO’s 
transmission revenue requirement is based. In other words, to the extent that a PTO 
requires a large load developer to contribute to the costs of constructing network 
upgrades on an upfront basis, those contributions offset costs that would otherwise 
have been added to the PTO’s rate base and included in the regional transmission 
access charge. In this way, a PTO mechanism to require upfront payments would 
protect against any concerns in the Commission’s Order about cost shifting. There are 
also adjustment account mechanisms that can apply certain transmission revenues 
annually directly against the PTOs’ revenue requirements that are incorporated into the 
overall regional transmission access charge calculation. This could include financial 
security, minimum demand charges, exit fees, and similar mechanisms the Order 
mentions. The CAISO believes that sufficient flexibility exists in those mechanisms for 
the PTOs. The CAISO does not believe changing the transmission access charge is 
necessary at this time to effectuate the PTOs’ proposals to address the Commission’s 
cost shifting concerns for large loads. 
2. Data Transparency 
In the Order, the Commission highlighted the need for “the provision of data on CAISO’s 
website in a single location, and in an easily accessible format that is searchable and 
allows users to filter the data, on transmission service provided to Eligible Customers on 
behalf of large loads, for network upgrades evaluated in the local transmission planning 
process that are needed to accommodate transmission service to Eligible Customers on 
behalf of those large loads, and the costs for those network upgrades.”36  
 
36  Order to Show Cause at P 46.
--- PAGE 27 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 27   
 
Proposal 
 
The CAISO agrees that cost data should be transparent and can be provided on the 
CAISO website in a searchable format. This is important both to aid large load 
developers in making efficient siting decisions as well as to provide information critical 
for state regulators to ensure fair cost allocation at the retail level.  
 
For large load developers, the CAISO notes that for the generator interconnection study 
process, the CAISO already provides each PTO’s per unit cost guide for all network 
upgrade cost components.37 These guides are updated and shared with stakeholders 
annually based on the latest industry cost estimates. The CAISO proposes to use the 
per unit cost guides or enhance them as needed to ensure large load developers can 
easily obtain cost data. 
 
For state regulators and stakeholders, per the Commission’s direction,38 the CAISO also 
proposes to clarify in the TPP where network upgrades were needed to accommodate 
both general load growth and large load interconnection specifically. Large load growth 
has already been incorporated into the CEC, CPUC, and CAISO forecasting and 
planning processes, as detailed in the CAISO’s Informational Report on Resource 
Sufficiency already submitted to the Commission.39 The CAISO also proposes to 
publicly post: 
 
1. Aggregate amounts of proposed large load additions in the CAISO operating 
area, including the aggregate amounts in each transmission pricing zone; 
2. Planned network upgrades needed to accommodate Eligible Customers taking 
transmission service on behalf of large loads, identified by type of equipment and 
network upgrade (e.g., new substation, reconductoring, a new high-voltage 
transmission line) for each transmission service request; and 
3. Cost estimates for each planned network upgrade identified as needed for large 
loads, as described in (2).40 
 
The CAISO proposes to memorialize these transparency requirements in its tariff. The 
CAISO also encourages the PTOs to memorialize tariff requirements to adopt large load 
queue spreadsheets as it does for wholesale generator interconnection customers. The 
 
37  See CAISO Current cost guides at  https://www.caiso.com/library/current -cost -guides. 
38  Order to Show Cause  at P 72. 
39  See CAISO Informational Report - Large Loads and Co -located Loads  at 
https://www.caiso.com/documents/jul-20-2026-informational -report-large-loads -and-co-located -loads -
el26-71.pdf . 
40  Order to Show Cause at P 75.
--- PAGE 28 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 28   
CAISO likewise proposes to include in its queue report whether the interconnection 
customer proposes to include a large load, and its capacity.41 
C. Co-Location Arrangements and Load with Behind the Meter 
Generation 
1. Terminology 
For purposes of the Order, the Commission defined “co-located load” as “end-use 
customer load that is physically connected to the facilities of an existing or planned 
generating facility on the generator interconnection customer’s side of the point of 
interconnection to the RTO/ISO’s transmission system.”42 FERC further defined “Behind 
the Meter Generation” as “a generating facility that delivers energy to load without using 
the transmission system or any distribution facilities.”43 The Commission did not 
explicitly suggest that the CAISO or PTO tariffs were unjust and unreasonable because 
they lack definitions of co-located loads or behind-the-meter generation. 
 
Proposal 
 
The CAISO generally agrees with both definitions; h owever, the CAISO would exclude 
from discussion station power load and the generation that exclusively serves station 
power load. The CAISO believes the Commission is focused on typical end-user loads 
and not loads facilitating wholesale power.44 The CAISO does not believe it is 
necessary to create formal tariff definitions for co-located load or behind-the-meter 
generation and is not proposing to do so. Both terms already have plain meanings, and 
behind-the-meter is already used frequently throughout the CAISO tariff, including for 
different configurations based on whether the meter is a CAISO meter or a retail end-
user meter. Thus, providing a definition may have inadvertent consequences to the 
extent it differs in any meaningful respect from the use of these terms currently. The 
CAISO may provide clarifications if needed in its business practice manuals. 
2. Serving Co-Located Loads 
The Commission stated in the Order that the CAISO’s tariff does not contain provisions 
addressing with sufficient clarity and consistency the rates, terms, and conditions of 
 
41  See CAISO Generator interconnection at  https://www.caiso.com/generation -
transmission/generation/generator -interconnection .  
42  Order to Show Cause at P 88.  
43  Id. at P 89.  
44  The CAISO will continue to expect station power load to be metered separately from other loads 
and generation, consistent with local regulatory authority requirements.
--- PAGE 29 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 29   
service that apply to interconnection customers serving co-located load.45 The 
Commission included, “the scope of the analyses CAISO performs as part of its existing 
study process to evaluate the impacts of co-location arrangements, which may need to 
account for any potential dynamic impacts of co-located load and any potential impacts 
of requests to modify an existing generating facility’s interconnection service level to 
serve co-located load on transmission system reliability.”46 The Commission noted that 
in one of its recent orders on co-located load in the PJM Interconnection (PJM), it found 
that it was necessary to clarify that interconnection customers seeking to use new 
generating facilities to serve co-located load may: (1) request interconnection service at 
a level below the generating facility’s maximum facility output; (2) use existing 
procedures to accelerate interconnection requests that satisfy certain tariff criteria; and 
(3) request provisional interconnection service and surplus interconnection service.47 
The Commission additionally noted that interconnection customers should have a 
means of knowing the appropriate mechanism for setting forth the terms and conditions 
of co-location arrangements. The Commission also expressed concern that “without an 
eligible customer designated to take transmission service on behalf of a co-located load, 
there is no mechanism for CAISO to address situations in which a co-located load 
withdraws energy from the transmission system.”48 
 
Proposal 
 
The CAISO proposes to clarify how co-located large loads and generation may 
interconnect to and operate within the CAISO-controlled grid.  Such clarifications will 
require discussion and agreement with the PTOs. The CAISO reiterates that the PTOs 
will continue to govern and study all load interconnection requests pursuant to their 
tariffs. The CAISO, likewise, will continue to govern and study wholesale generation 
interconnection requests. Despite the Commission’s concerns, large loads and co-
located configurations have materialized in California under the current tariffs. 
 
Nevertheless, the CAISO proposes to clarify in its tariff co-location arrangements that 
would not require a CAISO resource interconnection request and could be 
accommodated through applicable PTO or CPUC-jurisdictional retail interconnection 
 
45  Order to Show Cause at P 93. The Order to Show Cause has similar discussions of co-located 
loads in Section E, Interconnection Customers Serving Electrically Proximate Large Load and Co-Located 
Load; however, the CAISO includes all co -location -related prop osals here for concision.  
46  Id. at P 96.  
47  PJM Interconnection, L.L.C., 193 FERC ¶ 61,217 at PP 231-235 (2025) (PJM Co-Location 
Order). PJM’s compliance filing proposing revisions in response to these directives was accepted in part 
on April 16, 2026. PJM Interconnection, L.L.C. , 195 FERC ¶ 61,030 (2026).  
48  Order to Show Cause at P 96.
--- PAGE 30 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 30   
tariffs, such as Rule 21.49 These would include large loads with back-up generation only 
to be used during outages or islanding, and large loads with non-exporting behind-the-
meter generation.50 The CAISO notes that both categories would require sufficient 
control technologies to ensure they do not impact the transmission grid.   
 
The CAISO proposes that new or existing large loads proposing to co-locate with new 
generation that may export energy to the transmission grid51 will require a CAISO 
interconnection study under the CAISO’s Resource Interconnection Standards, 
Appendix KK to the CAISO tariff. This means that such resource interconnection 
requests would be screened and compete for capacity in the next cluster study based 
on the CAISO’s scoring criteria.52 However, all scoring, financial requirements, and 
study results would be based on the requested capacity figures the developer provides, 
so the developer may significantly limit the generation potentially to be exported based 
on how much generation will serve the large load. The CAISO tariff will require it to work 
with the PTOs to produce study results that reflect the combined impact of the co-
located large load and generation, as requested by the developer. This is a simple 
extension of current rules that allow interconnection customers to be studied for a 
specific interconnection capacity even if their generating capacity is higher. 
Interconnection requests with co-located large loads may avail themselves of all rights 
under the Resource Interconnection Standards, including surplus interconnection 
service, grid enhancing technologies, phasing, etc.  
 
Despite the ubiquity of co-located resources in California, to date, the CAISO has not 
received any interconnection requests for co-located load with exporting or participating 
generation, nor has any developer asked for such an option. The CAISO may be in a 
different situation than other regions that needed to impose bring-your-own generation 
requirements to address capacity issues. Because the CAISO does not have a bring-
your-own generation requirement and load-serving entities are not required to procure 
new capacity to interconnect new loads, developers have been less interested in co-
locating load and participating generation. Additionally, to the extent large loads have 
brought generation to serve onsite load, they have elected to do so through tariffs for 
net energy metering, obviating the need for a CAISO interconnection request.  
 
 
49  See CPUC’s Electric Rule 21: Generating Facility Interconnections for more information on each 
CPUC jurisdictional load -serving entities ’ Rule 21 tariff  at https://www.cpuc.ca.gov/Rule21/ .  
50  The sequencing likewise would not impact whether a CAISO interconnection study would be 
required. 
51  Frequently, constantly, or even rarely, such as in the event the Large Load is offline.  
52  As Energy Only or Deliverable. Energy Only interconnection customers not seeking 
reimbursement for network upgrades are not screened and proceed directly to the cluster study.
--- PAGE 31 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 31   
In addition to the information required in the CAISO resource interconnection request 
process, and the large load operational requirements discussed in Section A.4, the 
CAISO may require the following operational information for co-located resources, if 
applicable: 
• Expected presence of co-located load   
• Range of energy consumption characteristics of the load 
• Minimum and maximum generator operating capabilities 
• Generator operating characteristics when the load is at its minimum level 
• Market participation status, if any 
• Any load services requested when the generator is off-line 
 
For co-located large loads and wholesale energy storage, the CAISO notes that the 
storage and large loads would need to be separate operationally, and all study results 
would reflect the same. Energy storage resources are fully dispatchable and have 
separate wholesale meters and settlement. Their energy could not be commingled with 
the large load such that the large load could take power effectively at a wholesale rate. 
The large load could otherwise net its withdrawals against behind-the-meter/non-
participating generation and storage.53 
 
All network upgrade commercial readiness deposit and generator interconnection 
agreement deposit requirements would treat all network upgrades and interconnection 
facilities as if they were required for the generation only. However, the PTO also may 
apply any unique deposit or financing requirements for the network upgrades and 
facilities required for large loads, as discussed in Section B.1 regarding cost allocation.   
 
The CAISO also proposes to require co-located load and exporting generation studies 
to proceed through the cluster study process without removing the large load 
assumptions. In other words, after the commencement of the cluster study, the 
interconnection customer may not remove the large load as a modification. Likewise, 
interconnection customers already in the queue would not be allowed to add large loads 
as modifications. Both types of modifications would require complete re-studies and 
could not be accommodated during the study process. This is not to say that the CAISO 
proposes to prohibit the addition of large loads to existing generation or in-progress 
interconnection requests; only that the interconnection customer would need to do so 
through the PTO tariff, and the generation interconnection study results would not be 
able to reflect the combined configuration. 
 
 
53  In other words, the CAISO does not propose any change to the status quo for separating 
wholesale generation/storage and retail load or net energy metering generation/storage.
--- PAGE 32 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 32   
If an online CAISO generator seeks to add a large load to its site, the developer would 
submit the large load interconnection request to the PTO pursuant to its tariff. When 
ready to reflect the large load, the interconnection customer could request a post-
commercial operation date (COD) modification54 or use the Master File change process 
as needed to assess and capture changes currently allowed under these processes.55 
The CAISO, PTO, and interconnection customer could likewise amend the generator 
interconnection agreement to reflect the large load and any configuration changes.  
 
The CAISO reiterates its policy recently approved by the CAISO Board of Governors in 
the Interconnection Service Capacity and Deliverability Retention for Non-Operating 
Generating Facilities stakeholder initiative:56 
 
The ISO considers any generation that is subject to a [Participating 
Generator Agreement] and intends to terminate participation in the ISO 
wholesale market but continues generating to serve load through 
applicable retail programs, to also be subject to the retirement process as 
a generator that is permanently retiring (Retirement Scenario 3). This 
would include, for example, distribution-connected or transmission-
connected participating resources that wish to exit from the ISO markets 
to serve onsite load. Although such generators will continue to produce 
electricity, their exit from the wholesale markets will be treated as a 
retirement, including triggering a reliability-must-run review.  
 
The CAISO does not propose to change its current constructs under Order No. 888 for 
“Eligible Customers” to obtain transmission service. The CAISO does not have a 
forward capacity market, nor are load-serving entities required to procure capacity to 
obtain transmission service. Transmission service will thus continue to be assumed 
through an interconnection request, accounting for the large load’s ability to limit its 
energy withdrawals or injections.57 The large load’s load-serving entity will schedule the 
large load’s demand with the rest of the load-serving entity’s demand through the 
CAISO markets, just as it does today. This will continue to enable large loads, co-
located or not, to interconnect rapidly and without extra steps for transmission service. 
No large load developer to date has requested otherwise. 
 
54  Section 25.5 of the CAISO tariff.  
55  See CAISO Master File at https://www.caiso.com/systems -applications/portals -
applications/master -file.  
56  See CAISO’s Interconnection service capacity and deliverability retention for non -operating 
generating facilities  initiative at 
https://stakeholdercenter.caiso.com/StakeholderInitiatives/Interconnection -Service-Capacity-
Deliverability -Retention-for -Non-Operating-Generating-Facilities.   
57  Order to Show Cause at P 94.
--- PAGE 33 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 33   
 
The CAISO notes that both loads and generation associated with co-located loads can 
be eligible for resource adequacy or demand response programs pursuant to current 
program rules.58 The CAISO does not propose changes to the eligibility criteria for 
participation in any of these programs. Participation in demand response programs 
remains a possibility for large loads. The CAISO is exploring such opportunities in the 
DDEMI initiative.   
3. Cost Allocation for Co-Located Loads 
a) Ancillary Service Charges 
In the Order, the Commission stated that the CAISO tariff does not appear to include a 
mechanism to charge large loads, and co-located loads in particular, for ancillary 
services commensurate with their use of such services, particularly if such customers 
do not withdraw energy from the transmission system.59 Specifically, the Commission 
noted that co-located loads may unjustly benefit from regulation and black start 
services.60 
 
Proposal 
 
The CAISO agrees that assessing ancillary service costs on a net $/MWh basis to load-
serving entities’ measured demand would enable a large load co-located with behind-
the-meter generation to avoid an appropriate share of its costs for regulation and black 
start services.61 That said, the CAISO already has separate rates to assess regulation62 
and black start services.63 The issue thus becomes how to appropriately meter and 
assess those rates onto co-located large loads. The CAISO proposes to address this 
issue by requiring the PTOs to sub-meter each co-located large load independent of 
any onsite generation.64 Scheduling coordinators for the load-serving entities serving 
those loads would then be required to report those meter values separately for the 
 
58  Section 40 of the CAISO tariff establishes rules about eligible capacity and uses criteria provided 
by the CPUC and other Local Regulatory Authorities determine what projects are RA -eligible.  
59  Order to Show Cause at PP 98-99 (“As noted in the PJM Co-Location Order, this introduces the 
risk that costs may be allocated entirely to other transmission customers and passed through to 
residential customers, among others ”).   
60  Id. 
61  Likewise, if the rate were assessed on a net meter basis to co -located load and participating 
generation, the result would be the same.  
62  Section 11.10.2.1 of the CAISO tariff.  
63  Section 11.4.2 of the CAISO tariff. The PTOs assess the costs of black start services through 
their PTO tariffs.  
64  The CAISO could have an exemption for co-located loads connected behind generators subject 
to the CAISO’s Net Scheduled Participating Generator Agreement (PGA) or Qualifying Facility PGA .
--- PAGE 34 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 34   
relevant charge codes. Each large load with co-located generation would thus pay on a 
gross load basis for regulation and black start services. This solution not only results in 
just and reasonable cost allocation, it is also relatively simple to implement because the 
CAISO and PTOs would not be required to calculate and assess new rates, nor would 
the CAISO need to create new settlement charge codes. Each large load with co-
located generation would thus pay on a gross load basis for regulation and black start 
services. This solution not only results in just and reasonable cost allocation, it is also 
relatively simple to implement because the CAISO and PTOs would not be required to 
calculate and assess new rates, nor would the CAISO need to create new settlement 
charge codes.  
b) Transmission Access Charges 
The Commission preliminarily found in the Order that the CAISO tariff may be unjust 
and unreasonable because it allows load with behind-the-meter generation to net its 
generation against its load for purposes of calculating Regional Access Charges.65 The 
Commission explained its thinking based on the PJM co-location proceeding:  
 
In the PJM Co-Location Order, the Commission found that PJM’s BTMG 
rules, which allowed load-serving entities that provide service to loads 
with qualifying BTMG to reduce their costs by netting output from BTMG 
in the calculation of their peak demand for the purpose of determining 
NITS charges, were unjust and unreasonable.  The Commission 
concluded that PJM’s BTMG rules were no longer consistent with cost 
causation principles because large loads configured in a BTMG 
arrangement with significant generation will raise cost shifting concerns 
compared to loads pursuing smaller amounts of netting.  The 
Commission also found that such rules could lead to reliability and 
resource adequacy risks because PJM is obligated to serve transmission 
customers using BTMG but does not consider such customers in 
transmission and resource adequacy planning.66 
 
The Commission then noted that it is “similarly concerned that CAISO’s Tariff allows 
Eligible Customers that provide service to loads with BTMG to reduce their network 
service charges because the definition of gross load,67 which is used to calculate the 
 
65  Order to Show Cause at P 102.  
66  Id. 
67  Appendix A to the CAISO tariff defines Gross Load as “Demand (adjusted for distribution losses) 
of End-Use Customer Loads directly connected to the transmission facilities or directly connected to the 
Distribution System of a Utility Distribution Company or MSS Operator located in a PTO Service Territory, 
or End Use Customer Loads directly connected to the Distribution System or transmission facilities of an
--- PAGE 35 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 35   
Regional Access Charge, excludes load of a retail customer served by its own onsite 
generating unit or energy storage device.” The Commission directed the CAISO to 
explain whether the tariff remains just and reasonable even though it allows netting of 
behind-the-meter generation from gross load for purposes of determining Regional 
Access Charges for loads with behind-the-meter generation, or to propose tariff 
revisions. The Commission also stated the CAISO may explain why it remains just and 
reasonable for customers that fall below a new megawatt materiality threshold for the 
amount of load at a particular electrical location that network customers may net using 
behind-the-meter generation.68 
 
Proposal 
 
The CAISO does not propose to revise its current constructs for behind-the-meter 
generation, gross load, and the transmission access charges.69 Behind-the-meter 
generation is far more abundant in California than in PJM, so the CAISO and California 
policymakers have considered this issue far more critically. For example, in 2020, FERC 
approved the CAISO’s proposal to amend its definition of Gross Load—the billing 
determinant for transmission access charges—to include load served excess behind-
the-meter production, i.e., behind-the-meter energy that exceeds the onsite load.70 The 
CAISO amended this policy to ensure uniform settlement practices, and to ensure load-
serving entities were allocated the correct costs of their use of the transmission system, 
which includes use by excess behind-the-meter generation.   
 
The CAISO did not propose to assess transmission access charges based on gross 
load figures that included load served onsite by its own behind-the-meter generation. 
Neither the CAISO nor stakeholders in 2020 believed such loads use the transmission 
grid in proportion to those load figures. To the contrary, the point of rooftop solar, onsite 
storage, and other behind-the-meter generation is to reduce the use of the grid and the 
generation across it. The CAISO does not believe this rationale has changed in light of 
large loads.  
 
EDAM Transmission Service Provider in an EDAM Entity Balancing Authority Area. Gross Load includes 
Load served by Excess Behind the Meter Production. Excess Behind the Meter Production shall not be 
netted against End-Use Customer Load in determining Gross Load.” The definition also provides a list of 
certain loads excluded, including “ Load of an individual retail customer served by its own onsite 
Generating Unit or energy storage device, or as authorized by Section 218 of the California Public Utilities 
Code;” and “Onsite Load served by a qualifying small power production facility or qualifying cogeneration 
facility, as those terms are defined in the FERC's regulations implementing Section 201 of the Public 
Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 .” 
68  Order to Show Cause at P 102.  
69  Although the Commission focuses on the regional access charge, the same logic could apply to 
the local access charge as well.  
70  Cal. Indep. Sys. Operator Corp., Docket No. ER21 -190-000 (Dec. 23, 2020).
--- PAGE 36 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 36   
 
Perhaps more critically, the CAISO’s transmission access charges are fundamentally 
different than the PJM transmission charges that concerned the Commission. PJM 
calculates and assesses its transmission charges based on certain peak demand 
figures. A large load with behind-the-meter generation thus could mask all of its 
transmission usage simply by producing generation equal to its demand during that 
peak period. In contrast, the CAISO assesses its transmission access charges 24/7 to 
each utility distribution company or metered subsystem based on their gross load, which 
consists of total end-user demand accounting for losses and excess behind-the-meter 
production. As such, the CAISO would allocate costs to each large load with behind-the-
meter generation to the extent the large load used the transmission system, as reflected 
by its metered load. In other words, any energy withdrawal by the large would be 
reflected in the gross load. The load-serving entity can then easily pass down the costs 
of that use in the retail bill, just as every Californian with rooftop solar or home storage 
is billed today. Thus, the CAISO does not believe that changes to its tariff are needed to 
address concerns raised by FERC in the Order. 
c) Transmission Service Charges 
The Commission preliminarily found in the Order that the CAISO tariff lacks 
transmission services that would reflect the ability of Eligible Customers on behalf of 
large loads to take transmission services that align with their use of the transmission 
system, which may result in inefficient and costly transmission buildout and costs paid 
by transmission customers.71  
 
Proposal 
 
The CAISO agrees that enabling flexibility will offer cost savings by avoiding 
unnecessary network upgrades, both on an interim and permanent basis. The CAISO 
discusses its proposed new service options in Section D, below. 
D. Extending New Transmission Services to Eligible Customers 
Taking Service on Behalf of Flexible Large Loads   
In the Order, the Commission preliminarily found that the CAISO tariff may be unjust 
and unreasonable because it does not include transmission services that reflect Eligible 
Customers taking transmission service on behalf of flexible large loads that are willing 
and able to limit their use of the transmission system under certain conditions, 
suggesting that “firm use” is essentially the only type of transmission service available in 
CAISO. The Commission encouraged new transmission services be made available to 
 
71  Order to Show Cause at P 102 .
--- PAGE 37 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 37   
reflect the operational reality that large loads may use the transmission system to 
differing extents and certain large loads are willing and able to limit their use of the 
transmission system under certain conditions.72 At the same time, the Commission 
stated, “In the alternative, CAISO may explain whether, given that CAISO does not offer 
the transmission services required by Order No. 888, CAISO’s existing transmission 
service framework addresses the concerns described herein, or explain what specific 
changes to its existing transmission service framework would effectively provide the 
same range of transmission service options for flexible large loads as in the PJM Co-
Location Order.”73 The Commission then explained that the customer “must have 
necessary control technologies and/or protection systems, which may include a special 
protection scheme, to limit its energy withdrawals to its approved level,” which are 
typical elements of interconnection service.74 
 
Proposal  
 
The CAISO proposes to create new, flexible interconnection service options that will 
enable large loads and co-located loads to limit their energy withdrawals or injections to 
reduce their need for more network upgrades. The CAISO believes this will provide 
large load developers with the options they want while protecting ratepayers from the 
cost of network upgrades that could be avoided. Coordination with PTOs will be 
necessary to implement these interconnection service offerings. The CAISO does not 
propose to create new “transmission services” or create more responsibilities around 
Eligible Customers, which would require redesigning transmission and interconnection 
service entirely. The CAISO does not believe such a redesign is warranted, and the 
Commission expressly invites the CAISO to explain alternative service frameworks that 
may enable similar flexibility.75 
 
Moreover, in real time, load-serving entities can schedule demand as needed, including 
for customers limiting their use of the transmission system. With the operational data 
and process described in Section A.4, the CAISO can accommodate flexible loads 
without new separate classes of transmission service. This would also enable the PTOs 
to provide bespoke interconnection configurations for large loads, saving ratepayers 
from the costs of network upgrades that conform to specific “transmission services.” The 
CAISO and PTOs have already demonstrated the ability to manage load flexibility 
 
72  Id. at P 104.  
73  Id. at P 103.  
74  Id. 
75  Id. at P 101.
--- PAGE 38 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 38   
without new transmission service levels through other programs, such as the CPUC’s 
Emergency Load Reduction Program76 and other out-of-market load programs.  
 
The CAISO believes this course of action is consistent with developers’ desires to 
interconnect quickly and affordably. To date, no stakeholder has requested that the 
CAISO develop non-firm transmission services. To the contrary, developers consistently 
express that they are only interested in acquiring firm service and would only agree to 
be flexible temporarily to interconnect before completion of long-lead network upgrades. 
The CAISO believes it and the PTOs can accomplish the latter through new flexible 
interconnection services rather than impose transmission services on large loads and 
load-serving entities. 
 
In addition to the CAISO’s current generic firm service, the CAISO and PTOs propose to 
create two new flexible load interconnection services that will enable faster and more 
affordable interconnections: 
 
1. Flexible Interim Load Interconnection (FILI): This interim flexible load 
interconnection offering would enable large loads to interconnect flexibly and 
receive service up to a certain level based on grid conditions and constraints until 
network upgrades are complete, at which time the large load would switch over 
to receiving firm service. This will likely be a tailored option for each large load 
based on its point of interconnection and the constraints it faces. For example, 
some FILIs may require little flexibility for a limited time because there are few, 
less probable contingencies. Others may require more flexibility because of 
transmission constraints that require network upgrades with longer timelines. The 
FILI option provides flexibility to the PTOs, CAISO, and developers to customize 
solutions. For this reason, CAISO declines to propose any kind of temporal or 
capacity cap on this interconnection service offering. 
 
2. Flexible Load Interconnection - Permanent (FLIP): This permanent flexible load 
interconnection offering would enable large loads to interconnect and avoid the 
need to fund or wait for completion of those network upgrades that would be 
required for firm load service by accepting terms of flexible interconnection 
service in perpetuity. As with the FILI option, the PTO, CAISO, and developer 
could customize the solution to balance costs and flexibility while maintaining 
reliability on the system. 
 
 
76  See CPUC’s Emergency Load Reduction Program at https://www.cpuc.ca.gov/industries -and-
topics/electrical -energy/electric-costs/demand -response-dr/emergency-load-reduction-program
--- PAGE 39 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 39   
The CAISO believes that these interconnection service options would provide 
developers with the choices they may desire in the future to interconnect large loads in 
California and likewise address the concerns that drove the Commission’s preliminary 
findings in the Order. At the same time, the CAISO’s goal is to prioritize those services 
developers actually plan to use. Stakeholders should comment on which services the 
CAISO should prioritize, including whether options such as FLIP are not worth pursuing 
at this time.  
 
The CAISO does propose control technologies and/or protection systems associated 
with these new service offerings, which are discussed in Section A.4. 
E. Interconnection Customers Serving Electrically Proximate 
Large Load and Co-Located Load 
The Commission preliminarily found in the Order that the CAISO tariff appears to be 
unjust and unreasonable because it does not contain provisions allowing an 
interconnection customer to seek the generator interconnection service(s) that reflects 
the operational dynamics of serving either: (1) an electrically proximate large load; or (2) 
a co-located load, as defined in the Order, that has a high peak load (i.e., large co-
located loads that are 50 MW or greater).77 The Commission defined an “electrically 
proximate large load” as a large load “sufficiently electrically close to the interconnection 
customer’s requested point of interconnection, such that the impact on the transmission 
system of the combination of the generating facility and the load, with the exception of 
the transmission facilities between the two, will be effectively the same as if they were 
located at the same substation (e.g., large load that is located no more than two 
substations from the generating facility).”78  
 
Proposal 
 
As described above, the CAISO proposes to clarify its rules to enable co-located large 
loads and generation to be studied together regardless of the configuration between the 
onsite large load and generation.79 This would include modifying the generator 
interconnection process, studies, and agreements to reflect co-location and the 
electrical configurations necessary to enforce those study results and maintain safety 
and reliability.80  
 
 
77  Order to Show Cause at P 113.  
78  Id. at P 112.  
79  Exporting, non -exporting, participating generator, or non -participating generator.  
80  Id. at P 113.
--- PAGE 40 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 40   
However, the CAISO does not propose to create provisions for interconnection 
customers to serve electrically proximate large loads. Although this option exists in the 
Southwest Power Pool, the CAISO is unaware of any interconnection customer that has 
elected to use it. Moreover, large load developers in California have expressed no 
interest in such an option. This is likely because the electrically proximate 
interconnection construct is designed to meet bring-your-own generation requirements 
the CAISO does not have, need, or propose. Unlike other regions, California is not 
facing a capacity constraint that would require new large loads to bring or procure their 
own generating capacity merely to interconnect. The CAISO also is concerned that 
facilitating these interconnections could complicate and slow more common stand-alone 
and co-located load and generator interconnections, creating challenges where none 
existed. Finally, the CAISO is concerned that electrically proximate interconnections 
would potentially implicate California state law, which only contemplates the provision of 
energy at the same site as the load without becoming an electrical corporation subject 
to myriad utility requirements.81 
 
2. Initiative Timeline and Next Steps  
The CAISO’s Large Loads Stakeholder Initiative will become the primary vehicle for 
developing the CAISO tariff revisions necessary to comply with the Commission’s 
Order. The CAISO will refocus the initiative on the issues the Commission has 
identified. Given the timeline described in the Order, the CAISO is expediting the 
stakeholder initiative with two proposals: this straw proposal and a draft final proposal in 
September. Then the CAISO will seek Board of Governors approval at the CAISO 
Board’s October 28, 2026 meeting. While the stakeholder initiative will be expedited, the 
CAISO will host workshops and solicit stakeholder feedback on the proposals to better 
inform the policy outcomes. 
 
Action Tentative date  
Post Straw Proposal August 12, 2026 
Stakeholder workshop August 19, 2026 
Comments due September 2, 2026 
Post Draft Final Proposal September 21, 2026 
Stakeholder workshop September 28, 2026 
Comments due October 12, 2026 
CAISO Board of Governors October 28, 2026 
 
 
81  See Cal. PUC Code § 218.
--- PAGE 41 ---
Large Loads Considerations  
Straw Proposal 
ISO/TPID ISO Public Page 41   
3. Decisional Classification 
This initiative proposes certain tariff amendments to enhance the process for studying 
and approving interconnection requests. CAISO staff believe that these proposed tariff 
changes will go to the Board of Governors only and that the Western Energy Markets 
(WEM) Governing Body will have no role in the decision.  
 
The WEM Governing Body has primary authority over any  
 
proposal to change or establish a tariff rule applicable to the WEIM/EDAM 
Entity balancing authority areas, WEIM/EDAM Entities, or other market 
participants within the WEIM/EDAM Entity balancing authority areas, in 
their capacity as participants in WEIM/EDAM… The scope of this joint 
authority excludes, without limitation, any other proposals to change or 
establish tariff rule(s) applicable only to the CAISO balancing authority 
area or to the CAISO-controlled grid.82 
 
The tariff changes proposed here would not be “applicable to the WEIM/EDAM Entity 
balancing authority areas, WEIM/EDAM Entities, or other market participants within the 
WEIM/EDAM Entity balancing authority areas, in their capacity as participants in 
WEIM/EDAM.” Rather, they would be applicable “only to … the CAISO-controlled grid.”  
 
Accordingly, these proposed changes to implement these enhancements would fall 
outside the scope of the WEM Governing Body’s primary authority. The WEM 
Governing Body also has an advisory role that extends to any “proposals to change or 
establish tariff rules that would apply to the real-time and/or day-ahead market but are 
not within the scope of its primary authority.” This initiative, however, does not propose 
changes to the rules of the real-time or day-ahead markets. Stakeholders are 
encouraged to submit a response in their written comments to the proposed 
classification as described above, particularly if they have concerns or questions. 
 
82  Charter for WEIM and EDAM Governance § 2.2.1.
