----- PAGE 1 -----
RELIABILITY | RESILIENCE | SECURITY  
POWERING TODAY.  PROTECTING TOMORROW.  
Large Loads Frequently Asked Questions 
August 2026 
 
Addressing Large Loads on the Grid 
An increasing number of large commercial and industrial loads are rapidly connecting to the bulk power system (BPS). In 
particular, “computational loads,” such as data centers (including cryptocurrency and artiﬁcial intelligence), present 
unique BPS reliability challenges. 
 
NERC established the Large Loads Task Force in August 2024 (now the Large Loads Working Group (LLWG)) to understand 
emerging large loads  and identify eﬀective pathways for their integration.  The Member Representatives Committee 
provided written input and hosted a technical panel session at the February 2025 Board meeting. NERC’s Board issued a 
resolution in February 2025 directing NERC staﬀ to develop an action plan, which provides additional structure to 
NERC’s eﬀorts related to large loads integration.  The LLWG’s work products highlight some of the unique attributes 
associated with computational load integration. Through extensive analysis, report development, and engagement 
conducted to date, NERC has determined that it must act now to integrate computational loads to maintain a reliable 
and secure BPS.  
 
NEW Watch this video for a brief overview of NERC’s upcoming actions addressing large computational loads with 
additional details available in the information provided below. 
 
What NERC is Doing Related to Large Computational Loads  
 
NERC’s Large Loads Action Plan is advancing a three-pronged, concurrent approach:  
• Registration Criteria for Computational Loads : NERC will deﬁne which entities, based on speciﬁc  physical and 
electrical criteria, will be required to register  with NERC  and comply with  its Reliability Standards. NERC is 
proposing revisions to its Rules of Procedure to develop new registered entity types known as Computational 
Load Owners and Computational Load Operators.  
• Reliability Standards : NERC will develop and adopt Reliability  Standards to establish measurable 
requirements for registered entities with initial Reliability Standards required to be ﬁnalized by the end of 2026.  
• Technical Insights: NERC is soliciting industry input through alerts that prompt speciﬁc actions for registered 
entities. Working groups give NERC and Regional Entity subject matter experts the opportunity to interact with 
stakeholders on the complexities surrounding the integration of large computational lo ads. White papers and 
other resources provide detailed analysis and recommendations for stakeholders. 
 
In-Depth: NERC Actions to Address Large Computational Loads 
 
Registration 
NERC is proposing to establish new registered entity types called Computational Load Owner and Computational Load 
Operator (that would be subject to Reliability Standards) to address large computational loads. Accordingly, NERC plans 
to revise its Rules of Procedure, Appendix 5B Statement of Compliance Registry Criteria to account for Computational 
Load Entities. The draft was posted for an initial 45-day comment period on April 1, 2026,  on the Proposed Changes to 
Rules of Procedure  web page. In response to feedback, NERC posted proposed revisions that raised the MW and kV 
thresholds and developed a Computational Load Site deﬁnition, among other reﬁnements  to Appendices 2, 5A, and 5B 
for additional public comment for 30 days from August 19 to September 18, 2026. Stakeholders can submit 
comments here, and learn more here. NERC is required to ﬁnalize the registry criteria by the end of 2026.
----- PAGE 2 -----
Large Loads FAQs 2 
 
Standards Development 
In 2026, the drafting team under Project 2026-02 has prioritized foundational Reliability Standards with accompanying 
Glossary of Terms  updates that align with changes to the registry criteria to support reliable computational load 
integration. Beginning in 2027, additional standards will examine broader, more integrated changes.  
 
A 30-day initial formal comment period began on August 19, 2026, for stakeholders to provide input into proposed new 
computational load standards. Project 2026-02 will accept public comments through 8:00 p.m. Eastern on  September 
18, 2026. Project 2026-02 will accept public comments August 19 through September 18, 2026 with ballot period during 
the last 10 days.  The proposed Reliability Standards would align with FERC’s July order, and include improved situational 
awareness, enhanced model ﬁdelity, clear expectations for interfacing entities, and a structured framework for ongoing 
standards development. 
 
The proposed standards are based on requirements from currently enforced Reliability Standards that have been 
compliance-vetted and industry supported. Three foundational standards will address:  
- CLO-001-1 Computational Load Interconnection, Studies, & Modeling Data. 
- CLO-002-1 Computational Load Operational Data and Communications. 
- CLO-003-1 Computational Load Protection Coordination and Disturbance Monitoring. 
 
The proposal also includes very limited updates to FAC -001-5 and FAC-002-5 to ensure clarity. Stakeholders can submit 
comments via the Standards Balloting and Commenting System (SBS) . To vote, Registered Ballot Body members must 
ﬁrst join the Ballot Pool by  8:00 p.m. Eastern, September 3, 2026, via the link here. Stakeholders should review the 
Checklist for New Computational Loads  for actions they can take to participate in the process . See below under “How 
Can I Get Involved?” for more information. 
 
NERC has  also established the Computational Load Short -Term Advisory Group to support the drafting team in the 
standards development process. There are 105 members on the Advisory Group. In addition, observers interested in this 
project may join public drafting team meetings. Additional information is on the Reliability Standards Under Development 
page. 
 
Technical Insights 
 
Large Loads Working Group  
The Large Loads Working Group (LLWG) focuses on providing ongoing technical guidance, industry collaboration, and 
reliability risk assessment and monitoring for the increasing integration of large, complex, and rapidly evolving loads. The 
next meeting will take place on September 15. To join the LLWG, contact Evan Mickelson.  
 
Load Modeling Working Group  
The Load Modeling Working Group (LMWG) actively engages stakeholders through publications, technical presentations, 
and discussions focused on modeling loads  for power system studies . The group recently published and will continue 
updating a technical reference document to inform industry on how to model emer ging loads, including computational 
loads. The group has developed a tool to help data center and grid planners gather and submit data to improve the 
datacenter model quality. The LMWG is hosting a workshop on Data Center Modeling September 15-16 and will hold its 
next meeting on November 17. 
 
To join the working group please contact Hasala Dharmawardena through this request form.
----- PAGE 3 -----
Large Loads FAQs 3 
White Papers  
In July 2025, NERC published a white paper on Characteristics and Risks of Emerging Large Loads, which found that peak 
demand (or power consumption) is just one of several factors that can impact BPS reliability, and further action is needed 
to address these risks.  
 
A second white paper published in March 2026 examined Gaps in Existing Practices, Requirements, and Reliability 
Standards for Emerging Loads and found that the existing NERC Reliability Standards, as well as industry processes and 
requirements, are inadequate for the reliable integration of emerging large loads , including computational loads,  onto 
the BPS.  The white paper  contains recommendations for NERC, the NERC LLWG, registered entities, regulators , and 
policymakers, as well as others. These recommendations include updates to registration criteria, Reliability Standards, 
processes, and requirements. 
 
NERC is currently developing a white paper on Large Load Disturbance Performance: Impact Analysis and Ride -Through 
Recommendations that is targeted to be published in December 2026. The paper analyzes large load customer-initiated 
load reduction events and factors that impact large load performance during disturbances.  This paper also provides 
recommendations for ride-through and post -fault active power recovery requirements, as well as other 
recommendations, to address BPS reliability risks. A Standard Authorization Request on this topic is also being developed 
by the LLWG. 
 
Reliability Guideline  
In May 2026, NERC published a Reliability Guideline: Risk Mitigation for Emerging Large Loads. The guideline is intended 
to supplement (rather than replace) any existing or new Reliability Standards, and it is voluntary and non-binding. The 
focus is on improving modeling practices, analyses, coordination, data collection eﬀorts, real-time monitoring, and event 
analysis. NERC received more than 800 comments on the draft guideline and is appreciative of the level of stakeholder 
engagement. 
 
Industry Alerts  
In September 2025, NERC issued a Level 2 Industry Recommendation Alert  urging industry participants to take speciﬁc 
actions to mitigate risks to BPS reliability that may arise from the integration of large loads. Speciﬁcally, the alert focuses 
on interconnection practices, dynamic modeling , simulation practices, and operational coordination  related to large 
loads. NERC has posted a report summarizing the key ﬁndings from the Level 2 Alert. 
 
In May 2026, NERC followed up with a Level 3 Essential Action Alert , urging seven near-term mitigation actions that 
current registered entities should take to address critical reliability risks  from the integration of computa tional loads. 
The deadline for registered entities to submit their responses was August 3, 2026. 
 
FERC Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking  
NERC submitted comments to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission’s Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking 
(ANOPR) addressing the reliable interconnection of large loads. NERC previously ﬁled comments in the Commission’s co-
location proceeding in Docket No. AD24 -11. In the ANOPR comments, NERC cites its support for addressing the rapid 
growth of these large loads and appreciation for recognition of NERC’s role and its request that future actions reference 
NERC’ s full authority under Section 215 of the Federal Power Act to include users, owners, and operators of the BPS. 
Additionally, the comments underscore that NERC is actively collaborating with stakeholders to assess risks and mitigation 
options and to provide details on potential future eﬀorts. 
 
In March 2026, NERC submitted a supplemental letter to FERC detailing an accelerated action plan, including revising 
registry criteria and Reliability Standards by the end of 2026. On July 16, 2026, FERC directed NERC to develop and submit
----- PAGE 4 -----
Large Loads FAQs 4 
new or modiﬁed Reliability Standards  and Registry Criteria by December 31, 2026 to address  the reliability risks 
associated with the integration of computational loads into the BPS. 
 
Technical Conference  
NERC hosted a technical conference on February 24–25, 2026, to discuss power system risks and associated mitigation 
pathways for emerging large loads , focusing on computational loads . The conference focused on data centers and the 
characteristics of computational loads  and demonstrated the need for risk mitigation specific for computational loads . 
This conference also discussed planning and operations, interconnection processes, facility performance requirements, 
and other topics related to the integration of computational loads.  
 
How can I get involved in the process? 
 
Collaboration and engagement are at the heart of all of NERC’s initiatives. NERC has transitioned from the data collection 
and analysis phase to the comment and drafting phase in the development of Reliability Standards . As the process 
advances, perspective and input from stakeholders remains critical. 
 
In 2026, s takeholders will have the opportunity to provide comment s on the proposed registry criteria and Reliability 
Standards. NERC has a balloting process for passing Reliability Standards and deﬁnitions, ensuring that all interests are 
heard in a fair and equitable manner. Working groups and conferences will provide other opportunities to participate. 
 
Stakeholders are encouraged to take the following steps:  
• File comments on the second round of NERC Registry Criteria on or before September 18, 2026. 
• Join the NERC listserv to receive important updates on the process. Contact Zach Greene, Manager Strategic 
Engagement, to join the listserv and ask other questions as needed. 
• Review the Checklist for New Computational Loads  with links to actions that stakeholders can take right now. 
These include: 
 Join the Registered Ballot Body to vote on Reliability Standards. 
 Create a Standards Balloting System Account to ﬁle comments. 
 Sign up for an ERO Portal account for more information. 
• Join the Large Loads Working Group or the Load Modeling Working Group (please see above for the appropriate 
contact information). 
 
How do I stay informed? 
 
NERC has established a dedicated web page under the Initiatives tab on www.nerc.com to provide information on the 
Large Loads Action Plan. The page features resources from the LLWG and LMWG as well as Quarterly Updates, meeting 
presentations, recordings, and more information.  
 
About Computational Loads and Their Unique Needs 
 
What characteristics are typical for large loads? 
Historically, large loads referred to industrial facilities with high electrical demand. They had long er interconnection1 
timelines that allowed for more study time under traditional planning processes. Currently, emerging large loads include 
cryptocurrency mining and data centers (conventional and artiﬁcial intelligence),  which may be referred to as 
 
1 Interconnection refers to the process of integrating new generators, loads, or other equipment into the grid.
----- PAGE 5 -----
Large Loads FAQs 5 
“computational loads.” Many have a shorter timeline to interconnect (months vs. years) to the grid. In addition to these 
rapid timelines, some emerging large loads introduce new challenges to grid operators like rapid demand ﬂuctuations 
and increased voltage sensitivity. 
 
What unique factors exist with integrating computational loads onto the grid? 
Integrating computational large loads onto the grid poses several unique factors, including accurately forecasting future 
demand, ensuring that transmission and generation capacity keep pace with this demand, and managing rapid 
ﬂuctuations in consumption during all conditions— including fault and normal— which can destabilize the grid.  
 
What reliability challenges do computational large loads pose to the bulk power system? 
NERC has observed several reliability challenges resulting from computational loads around timing, data collection and 
forecasting, and modeling. The LLWG and other NERC assessments describe some of these matters as follows: 
 
Timing 
Some computational large loads seek to connect within one to two years, and the traditional planning processes are not 
equipped to ensure the grid can reliably serve this new demand. Additionally, the transmission upgrades required to 
handle the full new requested loads cannot be completed quickly enough. Since some loads want to connect to the BPS 
as soon as possible, they submit speculative interconnection requests to ﬁnd the interconnection point with the fastest 
timeline, signiﬁcantly increasing the number of interconnection studies utilities must perform. Due to the sheer number 
of interconnection requests, limited time is available to study the implications of these new loads. 
 
Data Collection and Forecasting  
To better quantify the risk, the electrical characteristics of computational large load facilities, such as ramping capabilities, 
power electronic settings, internal protection schemes, and coordination across multiple facilities, must be better 
understood. A better understanding of standardizing large-load modeling for long-term forecasting is needed. 
 
Modeling  
Current dynamic load models have challenges accurately representing the behavior of emerging large loads such as data 
centers. Considering the immense growth of these loads, modeling their dynamic behavior has become more critical 
than ever. NERC’s LMWG is working on modeling methodologies that can accurately simulate these emerging loads’ 
electrical behavior. These models can be used in studies to assess risks posed by large loads.   
 
Transmission Planning  
Currently, transmission expansion projects can take a decade from planning to energization. There is a growing urgency 
for processes to address the shorter-term needs associated with this rapid load growth. Additionally, rapid integration of 
computational large loads may pose short and long -term resource adequacy concerns, as generation can take years to 
be operational, longer than some large-load interconnection timelines of months to years. A proactive, holistic approach 
is necessary for integrating large loads. 
 
Voltage Ride-Through  
Currently, there are no speciﬁc voltage ride-through Reliability Standards for large loads. Computational large loads house 
a multitude of sensitive electronics that require ideal electrical conditions. If poor electrical conditions exist (like low 
voltage), computational loads can disconnect from the grid to protect their equipment from damage. This behavior gives 
rise to grid stability challenges.
----- PAGE 6 -----
Large Loads FAQs 6 
Co-Locating Large Loads 
Large loads co -located at generating facilities are referred to as co -located large loads. The Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission, NERC, and industry began examining co -located loads in 2024, with additional proceedings in 2025 and 
2026. Co-located loads present unique considerations as discussed in NERC’s ﬁling in that Commission proceeding. 
 
NERC’s ﬁndings and ﬁlings have highlighted the importance of planning and coordination to reduce risks, while noting 
that overall reliability impacts will depend on how large loads are implemented, their associated technologies, and any 
applicable regulatory framework. NERC has emphasized that maintaining diversity across electric generation and 
consumption will help ensure system reliability and resilience. NERC also noted the complexity of load balancing and 
forecasting associated with the changing resource mix. The complexity of this load and generation balance will continue 
to increase as more computational loads connect to the grid. 
 
Continued assessments reﬂect other potential considerations. For example, co -location of a generation unit at a load 
facility (or vice versa) can result in close dynamic interactions between these loads, generation and parts of the 
connecting utility, even in scenarios where the utility connection is only the provider of last resort. These dynamic 
interactions could aﬀect the reliability of the co-located facilities as well as the other users of the interconnected BPS. 
 
Furthermore, generation capacity and the Essential Reliability Services  that are associated with it are critical to 
maintaining BPS reliability. When generation capacity is removed or reduced from one location, the Essential Reliability 
Services it provided need to be supplemented elsewhere. Regardless of co -location or direc t connection, suﬃcient 
Essential Reliability Services will need to be provided on the transforming grid to maintain BPS reliability. All utility -
connected load facilities rely upon the Essential Reliability Services provided by the interconnected bulk power system.
